Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1331?1340,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Two Level Model for Context Sensitive Inference Rules
Oren Melamud?, Jonathan Berant?, Ido Dagan?, Jacob Goldberger?, Idan Szpektor?
? Computer Science Department, Bar-Ilan University
? Computer Science Department, Stanford University
? Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University
? Yahoo! Research Israel
{melamuo,dagan,goldbej}@{cs,cs,eng}.biu.ac.il
joberant@stanford.edu
idan@yahoo-inc.com
Abstract
Automatic acquisition of inference rules
for predicates has been commonly ad-
dressed by computing distributional simi-
larity between vectors of argument words,
operating at the word space level. A re-
cent line of work, which addresses context
sensitivity of rules, represented contexts in
a latent topic space and computed similar-
ity over topic vectors. We propose a novel
two-level model, which computes simi-
larities between word-level vectors that
are biased by topic-level context repre-
sentations. Evaluations on a naturally-
distributed dataset show that our model
significantly outperforms prior word-level
and topic-level models. We also release a
first context-sensitive inference rule set.
1 Introduction
Inference rules for predicates have been identi-
fied as an important component in semantic ap-
plications, such as Question Answering (QA)
(Ravichandran and Hovy, 2002) and Information
Extraction (IE) (Shinyama and Sekine, 2006). For
example, the inference rule ?X treat Y ? X relieve
Y? can be useful to extract pairs of drugs and the
illnesses which they relieve, or to answer a ques-
tion like ?Which drugs relieve headache??. Along
this vein, such inference rules constitute a crucial
component in generic modeling of textual infer-
ence, under the Textual Entailment paradigm (Da-
gan et al, 2006; Dinu and Wang, 2009).
Motivated by these needs, substantial research
was devoted to automatic learning of inference
rules from corpora, mostly in an unsupervised dis-
tributional setting. This research line was mainly
initiated by the highly-cited DIRT algorithm (Lin
and Pantel, 2001), which learns inference for bi-
nary predicates with two argument slots (like the
rule in the example above). DIRT represents a
predicate by two vectors, one for each of the ar-
gument slots, where the vector entries correspond
to the argument words that occurred with the pred-
icate in the corpus. Inference rules between pairs
of predicates are then identified by measuring the
similarity between their corresponding argument
vectors. This general scheme was further en-
hanced in several directions, e.g. directional sim-
ilarity (Bhagat et al, 2007; Szpektor and Dagan,
2008) and meta-classification over similarity val-
ues (Berant et al, 2011). Consequently, several
knowledge resources of inference rules were re-
leased, containing the top scoring rules for each
predicate (Schoenmackers et al, 2010; Berant et
al., 2011; Nakashole et al, 2012).
The above mentioned methods provide a sin-
gle confidence score for each rule, which is based
on the obtained degree of argument-vector sim-
ilarities. Thus, a system that applies an infer-
ence rule to a text may estimate the validity of
the rule application based on the pre-specified rule
score. However, the validity of an inference rule
may depend on the context in which it is applied,
such as the context specified by the given predi-
cate?s arguments. For example, ?AT&T acquire T-
Mobile ? AT&T purchase T-Mobile?, is a valid
application of the rule ?X acquire Y ? X pur-
chase Y?, while ?Children acquire skills ? Chil-
dren purchase skills? is not. To address this issue, a
line of works emerged which computes a context-
sensitive reliability score for each rule application,
based on the given context.
The major trend in context-sensitive inference
models utilizes latent or class-based methods for
context modeling (Pantel et al, 2007; Szpektor et
al., 2008; Ritter et al, 2010; Dinu and Lapata,
2010b). In particular, the more recent methods
(Ritter et al, 2010; Dinu and Lapata, 2010b) mod-
eled predicates in context as a probability distribu-
tion over topics learned by a Latent Dirichlet Allo-
1331
cation (LDA) model. Then, similarity is measured
between the two topic distribution vectors corre-
sponding to the two sides of the rule in the given
context, yielding a context-sensitive score for each
particular rule application.
We notice at this point that while context-
insensitive methods represent predicates by ar-
gument vectors in the original fine-grained word
space, context-sensitive methods represent them
as vectors at the level of latent topics. This raises
the question of whether such coarse-grained topic
vectors might be less informative in determining
the semantic similarity between the two predi-
cates.
To address this hypothesized caveat of prior
context-sensitive rule scoring methods, we pro-
pose a novel generic scheme that integrates word-
level and topic-level representations. Our scheme
can be applied on top of any context-insensitive
?base? similarity measure for rule learning, which
operates at the word level, such as Cosine or
Lin (Lin, 1998). Rather than computing a single
context-insensitive rule score, we compute a dis-
tinct word-level similarity score for each topic in
an LDA model. Then, when applying a rule in a
given context, these different scores are weighed
together based on the specific topic distribution
under the given context. This way, we calculate
similarity over vectors in the original word space,
while biasing them towards the given context via
a topic model.
In order to promote replicability and equal-term
comparison with our results, we based our experi-
ments on publicly available datasets, both for un-
supervised learning of the evaluated models and
for testing them over a random sample of rule ap-
plications. We apply our two-level scheme over
three state-of-the-art context-insensitive similar-
ity measures. The evaluation compares perfor-
mances both with the original context-insensitive
measures and with recent LDA-based context-
sensitive methods, showing consistent and robust
advantages of our scheme. Finally, we release
a context-sensitive rule resource comprising over
2,000 frequent verbs and one million rules.
2 Background and Model Setting
This section presents components of prior work
which are included in our model and experiments,
setting the technical preliminaries for the rest of
the paper. We first present context-insensitive rule
learning, based on distributional similarity at the
word level, and then context-sensitive scoring for
rule applications, based on topic-level similarity.
Some further discussion of related work appears
in Section 6.
2.1 Context-insensitive Rule Learning
A predicate inference rule ?LHS ? RHS?, such
as ?X acquire Y ? X purchase Y?, specifies a
directional inference relation between two predi-
cates. Each rule side consists of a lexical pred-
icate and (two) variable slots for its arguments.1
Different representations have been used to spec-
ify predicates and their argument slots, such as
word lemma sequences, regular expressions and
dependency parse fragments. A rule can be ap-
plied when its LHS matches a predicate with a
pair of arguments in a text, allowing us to infer its
RHS, with the corresponding instantiations for the
argument variables. For example, given the text
?AT&T acquires T-Mobile?, the above rule infers
?AT&T purchases T-Mobile?.
The DIRT algorithm (Lin and Pantel, 2001)
follows the distributional similarity paradigm to
learn predicate inference rules. For each predi-
cate, DIRT represents each of its argument slots
by an argument vector. We denote the two vectors
of the X and Y slots of a predicate pred by vxpred
and vypred, respectively. Each entry of a vector vcorresponds to a particular word (or term) w that
instantiated the argument slot in a learning corpus,
with a value v(w) = PMI(pred, w) (with PMI
standing for point-wise mutual information).
To learn inference rules, DIRT considers (in
principle) each pair of binary predicates that
occurred in the corpus for a candidate rule,
?LHS ? RHS?. Then, DIRT computes a reliabil-
ity score for the rule by combining the measured
similarities between the corresponding argument
vectors of the two rule sides. Concretely, denot-
ing by l and r the predicates appearing in the two
rule sides, DIRT?s reliability score is defined as
follows:
(1)scoreDIRT(LHS ? RHS)
=
?
sim(vxl , vxr ) ? sim(v
y
l , v
y
r )
where sim(v, v?) is a vector similarity measure.
Specifically, DIRT employs the Lin similarity
1We follow most of the inference-rule learning literature,
which focused on binary predicates. However, our context-
sensitive scheme can be applied to any arity.
1332
measure from (Lin, 1998), defined as follows:
(2)Lin(v, v?) =
?
w?v?v? [v(w) + v?(w)]?
w?v?v? [v(w) + v?(w)]
We note that the general DIRT scheme may be
used while employing other ?base? vector similar-
ity measures. For example, the Lin measure is
symmetric, and thus using it would yield the same
reliability score when swapping the two sides of
a rule. This issue has been addressed in a sepa-
rate line of research which introduced directional
similarity measures suitable for inference rela-
tions (Bhagat et al, 2007; Szpektor and Dagan,
2008; Kotlerman et al, 2010). In our experiments
we apply our proposed context-sensitive similarity
scheme over three different base similarity mea-
sures.
DIRT and similar context-insensitive inference
methods provide a single reliability score for a
learned inference rule, which aims to predict the
validity of the rule?s applications. However, as
exemplified in the Introduction, an inference rule
may be valid in some contexts but invalid in oth-
ers (e.g. acquiring entails purchasing for goods,
but not for skills). Since vector similarity in DIRT
is computed over the single aggregate argument
vector, the obtained reliability score tends to be
biased towards the dominant contexts of the in-
volved predicates. For example, we may expect
a higher score for ?acquire ? purchase? than for
?acquire ? learn?, since the former matches a
more frequent sense of acquire in a typical corpus.
Following this observation, it is desired to obtain
a context-sensitive reliability score for each rule
application in a given context, as described next.
2.2 Context-sensitive Rule Applications
To assess the reliability of applying an inference
rule in a given context we need some model for
context representation, that should affect the rule
reliability score. A major trend in past work is
to represent contexts in a reduced-dimensionality
latent or class-based model. A couple of earlier
works utilized a cluster-based model (Pantel et al,
2007) and an LSA-based model (Szpektor et al,
2008), in a selectional-preferences style approach.
Several more recent works utilize a Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al, 2003) frame-
work. We now present an underlying unified view
of the topic-level models in (Ritter et al, 2010;
Dinu and Lapata, 2010b), which we follow in our
own model and in comparative model evaluations.
We note that a similar LDA model construction
was employed also in (Se?aghdha, 2010), for esti-
mating predicate-argument likelihood.
First, an LDA model is constructed, as follows.
Similar to the construction of argument vectors
in the distributional model (described above in
subsection 2.1), all arguments instantiating each
predicate slot are extracted from a large learning
corpus. Then, for each slot of each predicate, a
pseudo-document is constructed containing the set
of all argument words that instantiated this slot in
the corpus. We denote the two documents con-
structed for the X and Y slots of a predicate pred
by dxpred and dypred, respectively. In comparison tothe distributional model, these two documents cor-
respond to the analogous argument vectors vxpred
and vypred, both containing exactly the same set ofwords.
Next, an LDA model is learned from the set
of all pseudo-documents, extracted for all predi-
cates.2 The learning process results in the con-
struction of K latent topics, where each topic t
specifies a distribution over all words, denoted by
p(w|t), and a topic distribution for each pseudo-
document d, denoted by p(t|d).
Within the LDA model we can derive the
a-posteriori topic distribution conditioned on a
particular word within a document, denoted by
p(t|d,w) ? p(w|t) ? p(t|d). In the topic-level
model, d corresponds to a predicate slot and w to
a particular argument word instantiating this slot.
Hence, p(t|d,w) is viewed as specifying the rele-
vance (or likelihood) of the topic t for the predi-
cate slot in the context of the given argument in-
stantiation. For example, for the predicate slot ?ac-
quire Y? in the context of the argument ?IBM?, we
expect high relevance for a topic about companies,
while in the context of the argument ?knowledge?
we expect high relevance for a topic about abstract
concepts. Accordingly, the distribution p(t|d,w)
over all topics provides a topic-level representa-
tion for a predicate slot in the context of a particu-
lar argument w. This representation is used by the
topic-level model to compute a context-sensitive
score for inference rule applications, as follows.
2We note that there are variants in the type of LDA model
and the way the pseudo-documents are constructed in the
referenced prior work. In order to focus on the inference
methods rather than on the underlying LDA model, we use
the LDA framework described in this paper for all compared
methods.
1333
Consider the application of an inference rule
?LHS ? RHS? in the context of a particular pair
of arguments for the X and Y slots, denoted by
wx and wy, respectively. Denoting by l and r the
predicates appearing in the two rule sides, the reli-
ability score of the topic-level model is defined as
follows (we present a geometric mean formulation
for consistency with DIRT):
(3)scoreTopic(LHS ? RHS, wx, wy)
=
?
sim(dxl , dxr , wx) ? sim(d
y
l , d
y
r , wy)
where sim(d, d?, w) is a topic-distribution similar-
ity measure conditioned on a given context word.
Specifically, Ritter et al (2010) utilized the dot
product form for their similarity measure:
(4)simDC(d, d?, w) = ?t[p(t|d,w) ? p(t|d?, w)]
(the subscript DC stands for double-conditioning,
as both distributions are conditioned on the argu-
ment word, unlike the measure below).
Dinu and Lapata (2010b) presented a slightly
different similarity measure for topic distributions
that performed better in their setting as well as in a
related later paper on context-sensitive scoring of
lexical similarity (Dinu and Lapata, 2010a). In this
measure, the topic distribution for the right hand
side of the rule is not conditioned on w:
(5)simSC(d, d?, w) = ?t[p(t|d,w) ? p(t|d?)]
(the subscript SC stands for single-conditioning,
as only the left distribution is conditioned on the
argument word). They also experimented with a
few variants for the structure of the similarity mea-
sure and assessed that best results are obtained
with the dot product form. In our experiments,
we employ these two similarity measures for topic
distributions as baselines representing topic-level
models.
Comparing the context-insensitive and context-
sensitive models, we see that both of them mea-
sure similarity between vector representations of
corresponding predicate slots. However, while
DIRT computes sim(v, v?) over vectors in the
original word-level space, topic-level models com-
pute sim(d, d?, w) by measuring similarity of vec-
tors in a reduced-dimensionality latent space. As
conjectured in the introduction, such coarse-grain
representation might lead to loss of information.
Hence, in the next section we propose a com-
bined two-level model, which represents predicate
slots in the original word-level space while biasing
the similarity measure through topic-level context
models.
3 Two-level Context-sensitive Inference
Our model follows the general DIRT scheme
while extending it to handle context-sensitive scor-
ing of rule applications, addressing the scenario
dealt by the context-sensitive topic models. In
particular, we define the context-sensitive score
scoreWT, where WT stands for the combination
of the Word/Topic levels:
(6)scoreWT(LHS ? RHS, wx, wy)
=
?
sim(vxl , vxr , wx) ? sim(v
y
l , v
y
r , wy)
Thus, our model computes similarity over word-
level (rather than topic-level) argument vectors,
while biasing it according to the specific argu-
ment words in the given rule application con-
text. The core of our contribution is thus defining
the context-sensitive word-level vector similarity
measure sim(v, v?, w), as described in the remain-
der of this section.
Following the methods in Section 2, for each
predicate pred we construct, from the learning
corpus, its argument vectors vxpred and vypred aswell as its argument pseudo-documents dxpred and
dypred. For convenience, when referring to an ar-gument vector v, we will denote the correspond-
ing pseudo-document by dv. Based on all pseudo-
documents we learn an LDA model and obtain its
associated probability distributions.
The calculation of sim(v, v?, w) is composed of
two steps. At learning time, we compute for each
candidate rule a separate, topic-biased, similarity
score per each of the topics in the LDA model.
Then, at rule application time, we compute an
overall reliability score for the rule by combining
the per-topic similarity scores, while biasing the
score combination according to the given context
of w. These two steps are described in the follow-
ing two subsections.
3.1 Topic-biased Word-vector Similarities
Given a pair of word vectors v and v?, and
any desired ?base? vector similarity measure sim
(e.g. simLin), we compute a topic-biased sim-
ilarity score for each LDA topic t, denoted by
simt(v, v?). simt(v, v?) is computed by applying
1334
the original similarity measure over topic-biased
versions of v and v?, denoted by vt and v?t:
simt(v, v?) = sim(vt, v?t)
where
vt(w) = v(w) ? p(t|dv, w)
That is, each value in the biased vector, vt(w),
is obtained by weighing the original value v(w)
by the relevance of the topic t to the argument
word w within dv. This way, rather than replac-
ing altogether the word-level values v(w) by the
topic probabilities p(t|dv, w), as done in the topic-
level models, we use the latter to only bias the for-
mer while preserving fine-grained word-level rep-
resentations. The notation Lint denotes the simt
measure when applied using Lin as the base simi-
larity measure sim.
This learning process results in K different
topic-biased similarity scores for each candidate
rule, where K is the number of LDA topics. Ta-
ble 1 illustrates topic-biased similarities for the Y
slot of two rules involving the predicate ?acquire?.
As can be seen, the topic-biased score Lint for ?ac-
quire? learn? for t2 is higher than the Lin score,
since this topic is characterized by arguments that
commonly appear with both predicates of the rule.
Consequently, the two predicates are found to be
distributionally similar when biased for this topic.
On the other hand, the topic-biased similarity for
t1 is substantially lower, since prominent words
in this topic are likely to occur with ?acquire? but
not with ?learn?, yielding low distributional simi-
larity. Opposite behavior is exhibited for the rule
?acquire? purchase?.
3.2 Context-sensitive Similarity
When applying an inference rule, we compute
for each slot its context-sensitive similarity score
simWT(v, v?, w), where v and v? are the slot?s ar-
gument vectors for the two rule sides and w is the
word instantiating the slot in the given rule appli-
cation. This score is computed as a weighted aver-
age of the rule?s K topic-biased similarity scores
simt. In this average, each topic is weighed by
its ?relevance? for the context in which the rule is
applied, which consists of the left-hand-side pred-
icate v and the argument w. This relevance is cap-
Topic t1 t2
Top 5
words
calbiochem rights
corel syndrome
networks majority
viacom knowledge
financially skill
acquire ? learn
Lint(v, v?) 0.040 0.334
Lin(v, v?) 0.165
acquire ? purchase
Lint(v, v?) 0.427 0.241
Lin(v, v?) 0.267
Table 1: Two characteristic topics for the Y slot of
?acquire?, along with their topic-biased Lin sim-
ilarities scores Lint, compared with the original
Lin similarity, for two rules. The relevance of each
topic to different arguments of ?acquire? is illus-
trated by showing the top 5 words in the argument
vector vyacquire for which the illustrated topic is the
most likely one.
tured by p(t|dv, w):
simWT(v, v?, w) =
?
t
[p(t|dv, w) ? simt(v, v?)]
(7)
This way, a rule application would obtain a high
score only if the current context fits those topics
for which the rule is indeed likely to be valid, as
captured by a high topic-biased similarity. The no-
tation LinWT denotes the simWT measure, when
using Lint as the topic-biased similarity measure.
Table 2 illustrates the calculation of context-
sensitive similarity scores in four rule applica-
tions, involving the Y slot of the predicate ?ac-
quire?. We observe that relative to the fixed
context-insensitive Lin score, the score of ?ac-
quire ? learn? is substantially promoted for
the argument ?skill? while being demoted for
?Skype?. The opposite behavior is observed for
?acquire ? purchase?, altogether demonstrating
how our model successfully biases the similarity
score according to rule validity in context.
4 Experimental Settings
To evaluate our model, we compare it both to
context-insensitive similarity measures as well as
to prior context-sensitive methods. Furthermore,
to better understand its applicability in typical
NLP tasks, we focus on an evaluation setting that
corresponds to a natural distribution of examples
from a large corpus.
1335
Topic t1 t2
Top 5
words
calbiochem rights
corel syndrome
networks majority
viacom knowledge
financially skill
?acquire Skype ? learn Skype?
p(t|dv, w) 0.974 0.000
Lint(v, v?) 0.040 0.334
LinWT(v, v?, w) 0.039
Lin(v, v?) 0.165
?acquire Skype ? purchase Skype?
p(t|dv, w) 0.974 0.000
Lint(v, v?) 0.427 0.241
LinWT(v, v?, w) 0.417
Lin(v, v?) 0.267
?acquire skill ? learn skill?
p(t|dv, w) 0.000 0.380
Lint(v, v?) 0.040 0.334
LinWT(v, v?, w) 0.251
Lin(v, v?) 0.165
?acquire skill ? purchase skill?
p(t|dv, w) 0.000 0.380
Lint(v, v?) 0.427 0.241
LinWT(v, v?, w) 0.181
Lin(v, v?) 0.267
Table 2: Context-sensitive similarity scores (in
bold) for the Y slots of four rule applications. The
components of the score calculation are shown for
the topics of Table 1. For each rule application,
the table shows a couple of the topic-biased scores
Lint of the rule (as in Table 1), along with the topic
relevance for the given context p(t|dv, w), which
weighs the topic-biased scores in the LinWT cal-
culation. The context-insensitive Lin score is
shown for comparison.
4.1 Evaluated Rule Application Methods
We evaluated the following rule application meth-
ods: the original context-insensitive word model,
following DIRT (Lin and Pantel, 2001), as de-
scribed in Equation 1, denoted by CI; our own
topic-word context-sensitive model, as described
in Equation 6, denoted by WT. In addition, we
evaluated two variants of the topic-level context-
sensitive model, denoted DC and SC. DC follows
the double conditioned contextualized similarity
measure according to Equation 4, as implemented
by (Ritter et al, 2010), while SC follows the sin-
gle conditioned one at Equation 5, as implemented
by (Dinu and Lapata, 2010b; Dinu and Lapata,
2010a).
Since our model can contextualize various dis-
tributional similarity measures, we evaluated the
performance of all the above methods on several
base similarity measures and their learned rule-
sets, namely Lin (Lin, 1998), BInc (Szpektor and
Dagan, 2008) and vector Cosine similarity. The
Lin similarity measure is described in Equation 2.
Binc (Szpektor and Dagan, 2008) is a directional
similarity measure between word vectors, which
outperformed Lin for predicate inference (Szpek-
tor and Dagan, 2008).
To build the rule-sets and models for the tested
approaches we utilized the ReVerb corpus (Fader
et al, 2011), a large scale publicly available web-
based open extractions data set, containing about
15 million unique template extractions.3 ReVerb
template extractions/instantiations are in the form
of a tuple (x, pred, y), containing pred, a verb
predicate, x, the argument instantiation of the tem-
plate?s slot X , and y, the instantiation of the tem-
plate?s slot Y .
ReVerb includes over 600,000 different tem-
plates that comprise a verb but may also include
other words, for example ?X can accommodate up
to Y?. Yet, many of these templates share a similar
meaning, e.g. ?X accommodate up to Y?, ?X can
accommodate up to Y?, ?X will accommodate up
to Y?, etc. Following Sekine (2005), we clustered
templates that share their main verb predicate in
order to scale down the number of different pred-
icates in the corpus and collect richer word co-
occurrence statistics per predicate.
Next, we applied some clean-up preprocessing
to the ReVerb extractions. This includes discard-
ing stop words, rare words and non-alphabetical
words instantiating either the X or the Y argu-
ments. In addition, we discarded all predicates
that co-occur with less than 100 unique argument
words in each slot. The remaining corpus consists
of 7 million unique extractions and 2,155 verb
predicates.
Finally, we trained an LDA model, as described
in Section 2, using Mallet (McCallum, 2002).
Then, for each original context-insensitive simi-
larity measure, we learned from ReVerb a rule-set
comprised of the top 500 rules for every identi-
fied predicate. To complete the learning, we cal-
culated the topic-biased similarity score for each
learned rule under each LDA topic, as specified
in our context-sensitive model. We release a rule
set comprising the top 500 context-sensitive rules
that we learned for each of the verb predicates in
our learning corpus, along with our trained LDA
3ReVerb is available at http://reverb.cs.
washington.edu/
1336
Method Lin BInc Cosine
Valid 266 254 272
Invalid 545 523 539
Total 811 777 811
Table 3: Sizes of rule application test set for each
learned rule-set.
model.4
4.2 Evaluation Task
To evaluate the performance of the different meth-
ods we chose the dataset constructed by Zeich-
ner et al (2012). 5 This publicly available dataset
contains about 6,500 manually annotated predi-
cate template rule applications, each one labeled
as correct or incorrect. For example, ?Jack agree
with Jill 9 Jack feel sorry for Jill? is a rule ap-
plication in this dataset, labeled as incorrect, and
?Registration open this month? Registration be-
gin this month? is another rule application, labeled
as correct. Rule applications were generated by
randomly sampling extractions from ReVerb, such
as (?Jack?,?agree with?,?Jill?) and then sampling
possible rules for each, such as ?agree with? feel
sorry for?. Hence, this dataset provides naturally
distributed rule inferences with respect to ReVerb.
Whenever we evaluated a distributional similar-
ity measure (namely Lin, BInc, or Cosine), we
discarded instances from Zeichner et al?s dataset
in which the assessed rule is not in the context-
insensitive rule-set learned for this measure or the
argument instantiation of the rule is not in the LDA
lexicon. We refer to the remaining instances as the
test set per measure, e.g. Lin?s test set. Table 3
details the size of each such test set in our experi-
ment.
Finally, the task under which we assessed the
tested models is to rank all rule applications in
each test set, aiming to rank the valid rule appli-
cations above the invalid ones.
5 Results
We evaluated the performance of each tested
method by measuring Mean Average Precision
(MAP) (Manning et al, 2008) of the rule appli-
cation ranking computed by this method. In order
4Our resource is available at: http://www.cs.biu.
ac.il/? nlp/downloads/wt-rules.html
5The dataset is available at: http://
www.cs.biu.ac.il/?nlp/downloads/
annotation-rule-application.htm
Method Lin BInc Cosine
CI 0.503 0.513 0.513
DC 0.451 (1200) 0.455 (1200) 0.455 (1200)
SC 0.443 (1200) 0.458 (1200) 0.452 (1200)
WT 0.562 (100) 0.584 (50) 0.565 (25)
Table 4: MAP values on corresponding test set ob-
tained by each method. Figures in parentheses in-
dicate optimal number of LDA topics.
to compute MAP values and corresponding statis-
tical significance, we randomly split each test set
into 30 subsets. For each method we computed
Average Precision on every subset and then took
the average over all subsets as the MAP value.
Since all tested context-sensitive approaches are
based on LDA topics, we varied for each method
the number of LDA topics K that optimizes its
performance, ranging from 25 to 1600 topics. We
used LDA hyperparameters ? = 0.01 and ? = 0.1
for K < 600 and ? = 50K for K >= 600.
Table 4 presents the optimal MAP performance
of each tested measure. Our main result is that
our model outperforms all other methods, both
context-insensitive and context-sensitive, by a rel-
ative increase of more than 10% for all three sim-
ilarity measures that we tested. This improvement
is statistically significant at p < 0.01 for BInc and
Lin, and p < 0.015 for Cosine, using paired t-
test. This shows that our model indeed success-
fully leverages contextual information beyond the
basic context-agnostic rule scores and is robust
across measures.
Surprisingly, both baseline topic-level context-
sensitive methods, namely DC and SC, underper-
formed compared to their context-insensitive base-
lines. While Dinu and Lapata (Dinu and Lap-
ata, 2010b) did show improvement over context-
insensitive DIRT, this result was obtained on the
verbs of the Lexical Substitution Task in SemEval
(McCarthy and Navigli, 2007), which was manu-
ally created with a bias for context-sensitive sub-
stitutions. However, our result suggests that topic-
level models might not be robust enough when ap-
plied to a random sample of inferences.
An interesting indication of the differences be-
tween our word-topic model, WT, and topic-only
models, DC and SC, lies in the optimal number of
LDA topics required for each method. The num-
ber of topics in the range 25-100 performed almost
equally well under the WT model for all base mea-
sures, with a moderate decline for higher numbers.
1337
The need for this rather small number of topics is
due to the nature of utilization of topics in WT.
Specifically, topics are leveraged for high-level
domain disambiguation, while fine grained word-
level distributional similarity is computed for each
rule under each such domain. This works best for
a relatively low number of topics. However, in
higher numbers, topics relate to narrower domains
and then topic biased word level similarity may
become less effective due to potential sparseness.
On the other hand, DC and SC rely on topics as
a surrogate to predicate-argument co-occurrence
features, and thus require a relatively large num-
ber of them to be effective.
Delving deeper into our test-set, Zeichner et al
provided a more detailed annotation for each in-
valid rule application. Specifically, they annotated
whether the context under which the rule is ap-
plied is valid. For example, in ?John bought my
car 9 John sold my car? the inference is invalid
due to an inherently incorrect rule, but the con-
text is valid. On the other hand in ?my boss raised
my salary 9 my boss constructed my salary? the
context {?my boss?, ?my salary?} for applying
?raise? construct? is invalid. Following, we split
the test-set for the base Lin measure into two test-
sets: (a) test-setvc, which includes all correct rule
applications and incorrect ones only under valid
contexts, and (b) test-setivc, which includes again
all correct rule applications but incorrect ones only
under invalid contexts.
Table 5 presents the performance of each com-
pared method on the two test sets. On test-
setivc, where context mismatches are abundant,
our model outperformed all other baselines (sta-
tistically significant at p < 0.01). In addition,
this time DC slightly outperformed CI. This re-
sult more explicitly shows the advantages of in-
tegrating word-level and context-sensitive topic-
level similarities for differentiating valid and in-
valid contexts for rule applications. Yet, many in-
valid rule applications occur under valid contexts
due to inherently incorrect rules, and we want to
make sure that also in this scenario our model
does not fall behind the context-insensitive mea-
sure. Indeed, on test-setvc, in which context mis-
matches are rare, our algorithm is still better than
the original measure, indicating that WT can be
safely applied to distributional similarity measures
without concerns of reduced performance in dif-
ferent context scenarios.
test-setivc test-setvc
Size
(valid:invalid)
432
(266:166)
645
(266:379)
CI 0.780 0.587
DC 0.796 0.498
SC 0.779 0.512
WT 0.854 0.621
Table 5: MAP results for the two split Lin test-
sets.
6 Discussion and Future Work
This paper addressed the problem of computing
context-sensitive reliability scores for predicate in-
ference rules. In particular, we proposed a novel
scheme that applies over any base distributional
similarity measure which operates at the word
level, and computes a single context-insensitive
score for a rule. Based on such a measure, our
scheme constructs a context-sensitive similarity
measure that computes a reliability score for pred-
icate inference rules applications in the context of
given arguments.
The contextualization of the base similarity
score was obtained using a topic-level LDA
model, which was used in a novel way. First,
it provides a topic bias for learning separate per-
topic word-level similarity scores between predi-
cates. Then, given a specific candidate rule ap-
plication, the LDA model is used to infer the
topic distribution relevant to the context speci-
fied by the given arguments. Finally, the context-
sensitive rule application score is computed as a
weighted average of the per-topic word-level sim-
ilarity scores, which are weighed according to the
inferred topic distribution.
While most works on context-insensitive pred-
icate inference rules, such as DIRT (Lin and Pan-
tel, 2001), are based on word-level similarity mea-
sures, almost all prior models addressing context-
sensitive predicate inference rules are based on
topic models (except for (Pantel et al, 2007),
which was outperformed by later models). We
therefore focused on comparing the performance
of our two-level scheme with state-of-the-art prior
topic-level and word-level models of distributional
similarity, over a random sample of inference rule
applications. Under this natural setting, the two-
level scheme consistently outperformed both types
of models when tested with three different base
similarity measures. Notably, our model shows
stable performance over a large subset of the data
1338
where context sensitivity is rare, while topic-level
models tend to underperform in such cases com-
pared to the base context-insensitive methods.
Our work is closely related to another research
line that addresses lexical similarity and substi-
tution scenarios in context. While we focus on
lexical-syntactic predicate templates and instanti-
ations of their argument slots as context, lexical
similarity methods consider various lexical units
that are not necessarily predicates, with their con-
text typically being the collection of words in a
window around them.
Various approaches have been proposed to ad-
dress lexical similarity. A number of works are
based on a compositional semantics approach,
where a prior representation of a target lexical unit
is composed with the representations of words in
its given context (Mitchell and Lapata, 2008; Erk
and Pado?, 2008; Thater et al, 2010). Other works
(Erk and Pado?, 2010; Reisinger and Mooney,
2010) use a rather large word window around tar-
get words and compute similarities between clus-
ters comprising instances of word windows. In ad-
dition, (Dinu and Lapata, 2010a) adapted the pred-
icate inference topic model from (Dinu and Lap-
ata, 2010b) to compute lexical similarity in con-
text.
A natural extension of our work would be to ex-
tend our two level model to accommodate context-
sensitive lexical similarity. For this purpose we
will need to redefine the scope of context in our
model, and adapt our method to compute context-
biased lexical similarities accordingly. Then we
will also be able to evaluate our model on the
Lexical Substitution Task (McCarthy and Navigli,
2007), which has been commonly used in recent
years as a benchmark for context-sensitive lexical
similarity models.
In a different NLP task, Eidelman et al (2012)
utilize a similar approach to ours for improving
the performance of statistical machine translation
(SMT). They learn an LDA model on the source
language side of the training corpus with the pur-
pose of identifying implicit sub-domains. Then
they utilize the distribution over topics inferred for
each document in their corpus to compute sepa-
rate per-topic translation probability tables. Fi-
nally, they train a classifier to translate a given
target word based on these tables and the inferred
topic distribution of the given document in which
the target word appears. A notable difference be-
tween our approach and theirs is that we use predi-
cate pseudo-documents consisting of argument in-
stantiations to learn our LDA model, while Eidel-
man et al use the real documents in a corpus.
We believe that combining these two approaches
may improve performance for both textual infer-
ence and SMT and plan to experiment with this
direction in future work.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Israeli
Ministry of Science and Technology grant 3-8705,
the Israel Science Foundation grant 880/12, and
the European Community?s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment no. 287923 (EXCITEMENT).
References
Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, and Jacob Goldberger.
2011. Global learning of typed entailment rules. In
ACL.
Rahul Bhagat, Patrick Pantel, Eduard Hovy, and Ma-
rina Rey. 2007. Ledir: An unsupervised algorithm
for learning directionality of inference rules. In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP-CoNLL.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet alocation. the Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3:993?1022.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
volume 3944, pages 177?190.
Georgiana Dinu and Mirella Lapata. 2010a. Measur-
ing distributional similarity in context. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.
Georgiana Dinu and Mirella Lapata. 2010b. Topic
models for meaning similarity in context. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING: Posters.
Georgiana Dinu and Rui Wang. 2009. Inference rules
and their application to recognizing textual entail-
ment. In Proceedings EACL.
Vladimir Eidelman, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2012. Topic models for dynamic transla-
tion model adaptation. In Proceedings of the ACL
conference short papers.
Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pado?. 2008. A structured
vector space model for word meaning in context. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.
Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pado?. 2010. Exemplar-based
models for word meaning in context. In Proceedings
of the ACL conference short papers.
1339
Anthony Fader, Stephen Soderland, and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information ex-
traction. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Lili Kotlerman, Ido Dagan, Idan Szpektor, and Maayan
Zhitomirsky-Geffet. 2010. Directional distribu-
tional similarity for lexical inference. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 16(4):359?389.
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. DIRT ? discov-
ery of inference rules from text. In Proceedings of
ACM SIGKDDConference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining 2001.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering
of similar words. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL.
Christopher D Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and
Hinrich Schu?tze. 2008. Introduction to information
retrieval, volume 1. Cambridge University Press
Cambridge.
Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mal-
let: A machine learning for language toolkit.
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
Diana McCarthy and Roberto Navigli. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In
Proceedings of SemEval.
Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2008. Vector-based
models of semantic composition. In Proceedings of
ACL-08: HLT.
Ndapandula Nakashole, Gerhard Weikum, and Fabian
Suchanek. 2012. Patty: A taxonomy of relational
patterns with semantic types. EMNLP12.
Patrick Pantel, Rahul Bhagat, Bonaventura Coppola,
Timothy Chklovski, and Eduard Hovy. 2007. ISP:
Learning inferential selectional preferences. In Hu-
man Language Technologies 2007: The Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Learn-
ing surface text patterns for a question answering
system. In Proceedings of ACL.
Joseph Reisinger and Raymond J Mooney. 2010.
Multi-prototype vector-space models of word mean-
ing. In Human Language Technologies: The 2010
Annual Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alan Ritter, Oren Etzioni, et al 2010. A latent dirich-
let alocation method for selectional preferences. In
Proceedings of ACL.
Stefan Schoenmackers, Jesse Davis, Oren Etzioni, and
Daniel Weld. 2010. Learning first-order horn
clauses from web text. In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Diarmuid O Se?aghdha. 2010. Latent variable models
of selectional preference. In Proceedings of ACL.
Satoshi Sekine. 2005. Automatic paraphrase discovery
based on context and keywords between ne pairs. In
Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on
Paraphrasing (IWP2005).
Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2006. Preemp-
tive information extraction using unrestricted rela-
tion discovery. In Proceedings of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference of the NAACL, Main
Conference.
Idan Szpektor and Ido Dagan. 2008. Learning entail-
ment rules for unary templates. In Proceedings of
COLING.
Idan Szpektor, Ido Dagan, Roy Bar-Haim, and Jacob
Goldberger. 2008. Contextual preferences. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL-08: HLT.
Stefan Thater, Hagen Fu?rstenau, and Manfred Pinkal.
2010. Contextualizing semantic representations us-
ing syntactically enriched vector models. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL.
Naomi Zeichner, Jonathan Berant, and Ido Dagan.
2012. Crowdsourcing inference-rule evaluation. In
Proceedings of ACL (short papers).
1340
