Police and soldiers on Friday blocked off the street in front of a house where members of a terrorist gang are believed to have assembled the bomb that blew up the U.S. Embassy, killing 11 people.
German police raided several locations near Bonn after receiving word of a terrorist threat against the U.S. Embassy, but no evidence of a planned attack was found, officials said Wednesday.
An Islamic militant group on Thursday threatened to retaliate if Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden is arrested, and described Washington's No.
The Taliban's chief justice accused the United States on Wednesday of looking for an excuse to launch another missile attack on his war-shattered homeland.
NAIROBI, Kenya( AP) FBI agents this week began questioning relatives of the victims of the Aug. 7 U.S. Embassy bombing as well as the seriously injured on request of the U.S. Attorney's office for the Southern District of New York, a U.S. official said Thursday.
The man accused of orchestrating the U.S. embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya was declared a free man Friday in Afghanistan, where he has lived for years with the permission of the hard-line Islamic Taliban militia.
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 26 : Since the deadly bombing of two American embassies in Africa in August, there has been a troubling accumulation of evidence that the State Department inexplicably ignored warnings of possible terrorist attacks against the installations.
Federal prison officials have cut off virtually all communications for two men being held in Manhattan in the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
A federal grand jury in Manhattan returned a 238-count indictment Wednesday charging the Saudi exile Osama bin Laden with conspiring to bomb two U.S. embassies in Africa in August and with committing acts of terrorism against Americans abroad.
A federal district judge agreed Tuesday to review complaints by lawyers for three men arrested after the bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa that their jail conditions in Manhattan are unconstitutional and inhumane.
