Named Entity Recognition without Gazetteers 
Andrei Mikheev, Marc Moens and Claire Grover 
HCRC Language Technology Group, 
University of Edinburgh, 
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK. 

mikheev@harlequin, co. uk M. Moens@ed. ac. Uk C. Grover@ed. ac. uk 

Abstract 
It is often claimed that Named En-tity recognition systems need extensive gazetteers--lists of names of people, or- ganisations, locations, and other named entities. Indeed, the compilation of such gazetteers is sometimes mentioned as a bottleneck in the design of Named En- tity recognition systems. We report on a Named Entity recogni- tion system which combines rule-based grammars with statistical (maximum en- tropy) models. We report on the sys-tem's performance with gazetteers of dif- ferent types and different sizes, using test material from the MUC-7 competition. We show that, for the text type and task of this competition, it is sufficient to use relatively small gazetteers of well-known names, rather than large gazetteers of low-frequency names. We conclude with observations about the domain indepen- dence of the competition and of our ex- periments. 


Introduction 
Named Entity recognition involves processing a text and identifying certain occurrences of words or expressions as belonging to particular cate-gories of Named Entities (NE). NE recognition software serves as an important preprocessing tool for tasks such as information extraction, informa- tion retrieval and other text processing applica- tions. 
What counts as a Named Entity depends on the application that makes use of the annotations. One such application is document retrieval or au- tomated document forwarding: documents an-noted with NE information can be searched more 
"Now also at Harlequin Ltd. (Edinburgh office) accurately than raw text. For example, NE an- notation allows you to search for all texts that mention the company "Philip Morris", ignoring documents about a possibly unrelated person by the same name. Or you can have all documents forwarded to you about a person called "Gates", without receiving documents about things called gates. In a document collection annotated with Named Entity information you can more easily find documents about Java the programming lan- guage without getting documents about Java the country or Java the coffee. 

Most common among marked categories are names of people, organisations and locations as well as temporal and numeric expression. Here is an example of a text marked up with Named Entity information: 
<ENAMEX TYPE='PERSON' >Flavel 
Donne</ENAMEX> is an analyst with <ENAMEX 
TYPE= 'ORGANIZATION ' >General Trends 
</ENAMEX>, which has been based in <ENAMEX 
TYPE='LOCATION'>Little Spring</ENAMEX> since 
<TIMEX TYPE='DATE' >July 1998</TIMEX>. 


In an article on the Named Entity recognition competition (part of MUC-6)Sundheim (1995) re- marks that "common organization names, first names of people and location names can be han- dled by recourse to list lookup, although there are drawbacks" (Sundheim 1995: 16). In fact, par- ticipants in that competition from the Univer-sity of Durham (Morgan et al., 1995) and from SRA (Krupka, 1995) report that gazetteers did not make that much of a difference to their sys- tem. Nevertheless, in a recent article Cucchiarelli et al. (1998) report that one of the bottlenecks in designing NE recognition systems is the lim- ited availability of large gazetteers, particularly gazetteers for different languages (Cucchiarelli et al. 1998: 291). People also use gazetteers of very different sizes. The basic gazetteers in the Iso- quest system for MUC°7 contain 110,000 names, but Krupka and Hausman (1998) show that sys- tem performance does not degrade much when the 
gazetteers are reduced to 25,000 and 9,000 names; 
conversely, they also show that the addition of an 
extra 42 entries to the gazetteers improves perfor- 
mance dramatically. 
This raises several questions: how important 

are gazetteers? is it important that they are big? 
if gazetteers are important but their size isn't, 
then what are the criteria for building gazetteers? 
One might think that Named Entity recognition 

could be done by using lists of (e.g.) names of peo- 
ple, places and organisations, but that is not the 
case. To begin with, the lists would be huge: it 
is estimated that there are 1.5 million unique sur- 
names just in the U.S. It is not feasible to list all 
possible surnames in the world in a Named Entity 
recognition system. There is a similar problem 
with company names. A list of all current compa- 
nies worldwide would be huge, if at all available, 
and would immediately be out of date since new 
companies are formed all the time. In addition, 
company names can occur in variations: a list of 
company names might contain "The Royal Bank 
of Scotland plc", but that company might also 
be referred to as "The Royal Bank of Scotland", 
"The Royal" or "The Royal plc". These variations 
would all have to be listed as well. 
Even if it was possible to list all possible or-

ganisations and locations and people, there would 
still be the problem of overlaps between the lists. 
Names such as Emerson or Washington could be 
names of people as well as places; Philip Morris 
could be a person or an organisation. In addition, 
such lists would also contain words like "Hope" 
and "Lost" (locations) and "Thinking Machines" 
and "Next" (companies), whereas these words 
could also occur in contexts where they don't refer 
to named entities. 
Moreover, names of companies can be complex entities, consisting of several words. Especially where conjunctions are involved, this can create problems. In "China International Trust and In- vestment Corp decided to do something", it's not obvious whether there is a reference here to one company or two. In the sentence "Mason, Daily and Partners lost their court case" it is clear that "Mason, Daily and Partners" is the name of a company. In the sentence "Unfortunately, Daily and Partners lost their court case" the name of the company does not include the word "unfortunate- ly", but it still includes the word "Daily", which 
is just as common a word as "unfortunately". 
In this paper we report on a Named Entity 

recognition system which was amongst the highest 
scoring in the recent MUC-7 Message Understand- 
ing Conference/Competition (MUC). One of the features of our system is that even when it is run without any lists of name.,; of organisations or peo- ple it still performs at a level comparable to that of many other MUC-systems. We report on exper- iments which show the di[fference in performance between the NE system with gazetteers of differ- ent sizes for three types of named entities: people, organisations and locations. 
2 The MUC Competition 
The MUC competition for which we built our sys- tem took place in March 1998. Prior to the com-petition, participants received a detailed coding manual which specified what should and should not be marked up, and how the markup should proceed. They also received a few hundred arti- cles from the New York Times Service, marked up by the organisers according to the rules of the coding manual. 
For the competition itself, participants received 100 articles. They then had 5 days to perform the chosen information extraction tasks (in our case: Named Entity recognition) without human inter- vention, and markup the text with the Named En- tities found. The resulting marked up file then had to be returned to the organisers for scoring. 
Scoring of the results is done automatically by the organisers. The scoring software compares a participant's answer file against a carefully pre- pared key file; the key file is considered to be the "correctly" annotated file. Amongst many other things, the scoring software calculates a system's recall and precision scores: 
Recall: Number of correct tags in the answer file over total number of tags in the key file. 
Precision: Number of correct tags in the answer file over total number of tags in the answer file. 
Recall and precision are generally accepted ways of measuring system performance in this field. For example, suppose you have a text which is 1000 words long, and 20 of these words express a lo-cation. Now imagine a system which assigns the LOCATION tag to every single word in the text. This system will have tagged correctly all 20 lo- cations, since it tagged everything as LOCATION; its recall score is 20/20, or 100%. But of the 1000 LOCATION tags it assigned, only those 20 were cor- rect; its precision is therefore only 20/1000, or 2%. 
category  learned lists  common lists  combined lists  
recall I precision  recall lprecision  recall lprecision  
organization  49  75  3  51  50  72  
person  26  92  31  81  47  85  
location  76  93  74  94  86  90  

Figure 1: NE recognition with simple list lookup. 
3 Finding Named Entities 

3.1 A simple system 
We decided first to test to what extent NE recog-nition can be carried out merely by recourse to list lookup. Such a system could be domain and lan- guage independent. It would need no grammars or even information about tokenization but simply mark up known strings in the text. Of course, the development and maintenance of the name lists would become more labour intensive. 
(Palmer and Day, 1997) evaluated the perfor- mance of such a minimal NE recognition system equipped with name lists derived from MUC-6 training texts. The system was tested on news- wire texts for six languages. It achieved a recall rate of about 70% for Chinese, Japanese and Por- tuguese and about 40% for English and French. The precision of the system was not calculated but can be assumed to be quite high because it would only be affected by cases where a capitalized word occurs in more than one list (e.g. "Columbi- a" could occur in the list of organisations as well as locations) or where a capitalised word occurs in a list but could also be something completely differ- ent (e.g. "Columbia" occurs in the list of locations but could also be the name of a space shuttle). 
We trained a similar minimal system using the MUC-7 training data (200 articles) and ran it on the test data set (100 articles). The corpus we used in our experiments were the training and test corpora for the MUC-7 evaluation. 
From the training data we collected 1228 person names, 809 names of organizations and 770 names of locations. The resulting name lists were the only resource used by the minimal NE recognition system. It nevertheless achieved relatively high precision (around 90%) and recall in the range 40- 70%. The results are summarised in Figure 1 in the "learned lists" column. 
Despite its simplicity, this type of system does presuppose the existence of training texts, and these are not always available. To cope with the absence of training material we designed and tested another variation of the minimal system. 

Instead of collecting lists from training texts we in- stead collected lists of commonly known entities-- we collected a list of 5000 locations (countries and American states with their five biggest cities) from the CIA World Fact Book, a list of 33,000 orga- nization names (companies, banks, associations, universities, etc.) from financial Web sites, and a list of 27,000 famous people from several websites. The results of this run can be seen in Figure 1 in the "common lists" column. In essence, this sys- tem's performance was comparable to that of the system using lists from the training set as far as lo- cation was concerned; it performed slightly worse on the person category and performed badly on organisations. 
In a final experiment we combined the two gazetteers, the one induced from the training texts with the one acquired from public resources, and achieved some improvement in recall at the ex-pense of precision. The results of this test run are given in the "combined lists" column in Figure 1. 
We can conclude that the pure list lookup approach performs reasonably well for locations (precision of 90-94%; recall of 75-85%). For the person category and especially for the organiza- tion category this approach does not yield good performance: although the precision was not ex-tremely bad (around 75-85%), recall was too low (lower than 50%)--i.e. every second person name or organization failed to be assigned. 
For document retrieval purposes low recall is not necessarily a major problem since it is often sufficient to recognize just one occurrence of each distinctive entity per document, and many of the unassigned person and organization names were just repetitions of their full variants. But for many other applications, and for the MUC competition, higher recall and precision are necessary. 
3.2 Combining rules and statistics The system we fielded for MUC-7 makes exten-sive use of what McDonald (1996) calls inter-nal (phrasal) and external (contextual) evidence 
in named entity recognition. The basic philos- ophy underlying our approach is as follows. A 

Context Rule Assign Example 
Xxxx+ is? a? JJ* PROF PERS Yuri Gromov, a former director 
Xxxx+ is? a? JJ* KEL PERS John White is beloved brother 

Xxxx+ himself PERS White himself 

Xxxx+, DD+, PERS White, 33, 
shares in Xxxx+ 0RG shares in Trinity Motors 
PROF of/at/with Xxxx+ 0RG director of Trinity Motors 
Xxxx+ area L0C Beribidjan area 

Figure 2: Examples of sure-fire transduction material for NE. Xxxx+ is a sequence of capitalized words; DD is a digit; PROF is a profession; REL is a relative; J J* is a sequence of zero or more adjectives; LOC is a known location. 
string of words like "Adam Kluver" has an inter- nal (phrasal) structure which suggests that this is a person name; but we know that it can also be used as a shortcut for a name of organization ("Adam Kluver Ltd.") or location ("Adam Klu- ver Country Park"). Looking it up on a list will not necessarily help: the string may not be on a list, may be on more than one list, or may be on the wrong list. However, somewhere in the text, there is likely to be some contextual material which makes it clear what type of named entity it is. Our strategy is to only make a decision once we have identified this bit of contextual information. 
We further assume that, once we have identi- fied contextual material which makes it clear that "Adam Kluver" is (e.g.) the name of a company, then any other mention of "Adam Kluver" in that document is likely to refer to that company. If the author at some point in the same text also wants to refer to (e.g.) a person called "Adam Kluver", s/he will provide some extra context to make this clear, and this context will be picked up in the first step. The fact that at first it is only an assump- tion rather than a certainty that "Adam Kluver" is a company, is represented explicitly, and later processing components try to resolve the uncer-tainty. 
If no suitable context is found anywhere in the text to decide what sort of Named Entity "Adam Kluver" is, the system can check other resources, 
e.g. a list of known company names and apply compositional phrasal grammars for different cat- egories. Such grammars for instance can state that if a sequence of capitalized words ends with the word "Ltd." it is a name of organization or if a known first name is followed by an unknown capitalized word this is a person name. 
In our MUC system, we implemented this ap-proach as a staged combination of a rule-based system with probabilistic partial matching. We describe each stage in turn. 


3.3 Step 1. Sure-fire Rules 
In the first step, the system applies sure-fire gram- mar rules. These rules combine internal and ex-ternal evidence, and only fire when a possible can- didate expression is surrounded by a suggestive context. Sure-fire rules rely on known corporate designators (Ltd., Inc., etc.), person titles (Mr., Dr., Sen.), and definite contexts such as those in Figure 2. The sure-fire rules apply after POS tagging and simple semantic tagging, so at this stage words like "former" have already been iden- tified as JJ (adjective), words like "analyst" have been identified as PROF (professions), and words like "brother" as REL (relatives). 
At this stage our MUC system treats informa-tion from the lists as likely rather than definite and always checks if the context is either sugges- tive or non-contradictive. For example, a likely company name with a conjunction (e.g. "China International Trust and Investment Corp") is left untagged at this stage if the company is not listed in a list of known companies. Similarly, the system postpones the markup of unknown organizations whose name starts with a sentence initial common word, as in "Suspended Ceiling Contractors Ltd denied the charge". 
Names of possible locations found in our gazetteer of place names are marked as LOCATION only if they appear with a context that is sugges- tive of location. "Washington", for example, can just as easily be a surname or the name of an or- ganization. Only in a suggestive context, like "in Washington", will it be marked up as location. 
3.4 Step 2. Partial Match 1 After the sure-fire symbolic transduction the sys- tem performs a probabiiistic partial match of the 
identified entities. First, the system collects all named entities already identified in the document. 

4 It then generates all possible partial orders of talked about. 
the composing words preserving their order, and marks them if found elsewhere in the text. For instance, if "Adam Kluver Ltd" had already been recognised as an organisation by the sure-fire rule, in this second step any occurrences of "Kluver Ltd", "Adam Ltd" and "Adam Kluver" are also tagged as possible organizations. This assignment, however, is not definite since some of these words (such as "Adam") could refer to a different entity. 
This information goes to a pre-trained maxi- mum entropy model (see Mikheev (1998) for more details on this aproach). This model takes into ac- count contextual information for named entities, such as their position in the sentence, whether they exist in lowercase in general, whether they were used in lowercase elsewhere in the same docu- ment, etc. These features are passed to the model as attributes of the partially matched words. If the model provides a positive answer for a partial match, the system makes a definite assignment. 

3.5 Step 3. Rule Relaxation 
Once this has been done, the system again applies the grammar rules. But this time the rules have much more relaxed contextual constraints and ex- tensively use the information from already exist- ing markup and from the lexicon compiled dur- ing processing, e.g. containing partial orders of al- ready identified named entities. 
At this stage the system will mark word se-quences which look like person names. For this it uses a grammar of names: if the first capital- ized word occurs in a list of first names and the following word(s) are unknown capitalized words, then this string can be tagged as a PERSON. Note that it is only at this late stage that a list of names is used. At this point we are no longer concerned that a person name can refer to a company. If the name grammar had applied earlier in the process, it might erroneously have tagged "Adam Kluver" as a PERSON instead of an ORGANIZATION. But at this point in the chain of N~. processing, that is not a problem anymore: "Adam Kluver" will by now already have been identified as an ORGANIZATION by the sure-fire rules or during partial matching. If it hasn't, then it is likely to be the name of a person. 
At this stage the system will also attempt to re- solve conjunction problems in names of organisa- tions. For example, in "China International Trust and Investment Corp", the system checks if pos- sible parts of the conjunctions were used in the text on their own and thus are names of different organizations; if not, the system has no reason to assume that more than one company is being 
In a similar vein, the system resolves the at-tachment of sentence initial capitalized modifiers, the problem alluded to above with the "Suspended Ceiling Contractors Ltd" example: if the modifier was seen with the organization name elsewhere in the text, then the system has good evidence that the modifier is part of the company name; if the modifier does not occur anywhere else in the text with the company name, it is assumed not to be part of it. 
This strategy is also used for expressions like "Murdoch's News Corp'. The genitival "Mur-doch's" could be part of the name of the organisa- tion, or could be a possessive. Further inspection of the text reveals that Rupert Murdoch is referred to in contexts which support a person interpreta- tion; and "News Corp" occurs on its own, without the genitive. On the basis of evidence like this, the system decides that the name of the organisation is "News Corp', and that "Murdoch" should be tagged separately as a person. 
At this stage known organizations and locations from the lists available to the system are marked in the text, again without checking the context in which they occur. 
3.6 Step 4. Partial Match 2 At this point, the system has exhausted its re-sources (rules about internal and external evi-dence for named entities, as well as its gazetteers). The system then performs another partial match to annotate names like "White" when "James White" had already been recognised as a person, and to annotate company names like "Hughes" when "Hughes Communications Ltd." had al-ready been identified as an organisation. As in Partial Match 1, this process of par- tial matching is again followed by a probabilis-tic assignment supported by the maximum en-tropy model. For example, conjunction resolution makes use of the fact that in this type of text it is more common to have conjunctions of like entities. In "he works for Xxx and Yyy", if there is evidence that Xxx and Yyy are two entities rather than one, then it is more likely that Xxx and Yyy are two entities of the same type, i.e. both organisations or are both people, rather than a mix of the two. This means that, even if only one of the entities in the conjunction has been recognised as definitely of a certain type, the conjunction rule will help decide on the type of the other entity. One of the texts in the competition contained the string "UTited States and Russia". Because of the typo 
in "UTited States", it wasn't found in a gazetteer. But there was internal evidence that it could be Stage Sure-fire Rules Partial Match 1 Relaxed Rules Partial Match 2 Title Assignment 
ORGANIZATION PERSON LOCATION 
R: 42  P: 98  
R: 75  P: 98  
R: 83  P: 96  
R: 85  P: 96  
R: 91  P: 95  

R: 40  P: 99  
R: 80  P: 99  
R: 90  P: 98  
R: 93  P: 97  
R: 95  P: 97  

R: 36  P: 96  
R: 69  P: 93  
R: 86  P: 93  
R: 88  P: 93  
R: 95  P: 93  


Figure 3: Scores obtained by the system through different stages of the analysis. R - recall P - precision. 
a location (the fact that it contained the word "States"); and there was external evidence that it could be a location (the fact that it occurred in a conjunction with "Russia", a known location). These two facts in combination meant that the system correctly identified "UTited States" as a location. 

3.7 Step 5. Title Assignment 
Because titles of news wires are in capital letters, they provide little guidance for the recognition of names. In the final stage of NE processing, enti- ties in the title are marked up, by matching or partially matching the entities found in the text, and checking against a maximum entropy model trained on document titles. For example, in "GEN- ERAL TRENDS ANALYST PREDICTS LITTLE SPRING EXPLOSION" "GENERAL TRENDS" will be tagged as an organization because it partially matches "General Trends Inc" elsewhere in the text, and "LITTLE SPRING" will be tagged as a location because elsewhere in the text there is support- ing evidence for this hypothesis. In the headline 
"MURDOCH SATELLITE EXPLODES ON TAKE-OFF", "Murdoch" is correctly identified as a person be- cause of mentions of Rupert Murdoch elsewhere in the text. Applying a name grammar on this kind of headline without checking external evi- dence might result in erroneously tagging "MUR- DOCH SATELLITE" as a person (because "Mur-doch" is also a first name, and "Satellite" in this headline starts with a capital letter). 
4 MUC results 
In the MUC competition, our system's combined precision and recall score was 93.39%. This was the highest score, better in a statistically signifi- cant way than the score of the next best system. Scores varied from 93.39% to 69.67%. Further de- tails on this can be found in (Mikheev et al., 1998). 
The table in Figure 3 shows the progress of the performance of the system we fielded for the MUC competition through the five stages. 
As one would expect, the sure-fire rules give very high precision (around 96-98%), but very low recall--in other words, they don't find many named entities, but the ones they find are correct. Subsequent phases of processing add gradually more and more named entities (recall increases from around 40% to around 90%), but on occa-sion introduce errors (resulting in a slight drop in precision). Our final score for 0RGhNISATION, PERSON and LOCATION is given in the bottom line of Figure 3. 

5 The role of gazetteers 
Our system fielded for the MUC competition made extensive use of gazetteers, containing around 4,900 names of countries and other place names, some 30,000 names of companies and other organ° isations, and around 10,000 first names of peo- ple. As explained in the previous section, these lists were used in a judicious way, taking into ac- count other internal and external evidence before making a decision about a named entity. Only in step 3 is information from the gazetteers used without context-checking. 
It is not immediately obvious from Figure 3 what exactly the impact is of these gazetteers. To try and answer this question, we ran our system over 70 articles of the MUC competition in differ- ent modes; the remaining 30 articles were used to compile a limited gazetteer as described below and after that played no role in the experiments. 
Full gazetteers. We first ran the system again with the full gazetteers, i.e. the gazetteers used in the official MUC system. There are minor dif- ferences in Recall and Precision compared to the official MUC results, due to the fact that we were using a slightly different (smaller) corpus. 
No gazetteers. We then ran the system with- out any gazetteers. In this mode, the system can still use internal evidence (e.g. indicators such as "Mr" for people or "Ltd" for organisations) as well as external evidence (contexts such as "XXX, the chairman of YYY" as evidence that XXX is a person and YYY an organisation). 
The hypothesis was that names of organisations Full gazetteer Ltd gazetteer Some locations No gazetteers 

recall prec'n recall prec'n recall prec'n recall prec'n organisation 90 93 87 90 87 89 86 85 person 96 98 92 97 90 97 90 95 location 95 94 91 92 85 90 46 59 
Figure 4: Our MUC system with extensive gazetteers, with limited gazetteers, with short list of locations, and without gazetteers, tested on 70 articles from the MUC-7 competition. 
and names of people should still be handled rel- atively well by the system, since they have much internal and external evidence, whereas names of locations have fewer reliable contextual clues. For example, expressions such as "XXX is based in YYY" is not sure-fire evidence that YYY is a lo- cation -it could also be an organisation. And since many locations are so well-known, they re- ceive very little extra context ("in China", "in Paris", vs "in the small town of Ekeren"). 
Some locations. We then ran the system with some locational information: about 200 names of countries and continents from www. yahoo, corn/ Regional/and, because MUC rules say explicitly that names of planets should be marked up as locations, the names of the 8 planets of our so- lar system. The hypothesis was that even with those reasonably common location names, Named Entity recognition would already dramatically im- prove. This hypothesis was confirmed, as can be seen in Figure 4. 
Inspection of the errors confirms that the sys- tem makes most mistakes when there is no inter- nal or external evidence to decide what sort of Named Entity is involved. For example, in a ref- erence to "a Hamburg hospital", "Hamburg" no longer gets marked up as a location, because the word occurs nowhere else in the text, and that context is not sufficient to assume it indicates a lo- cation (cf. a Community Hospital, a Catholic Hos- pital, an NHS Hospital, a Trust-Controlled Hos- pital, etc). Similarly, in a reference to "the Bonn government", "Bonn" is no longer marked up as a location, because of lack of supportive context (cf. the Clinton government, the Labour government, etc). And in financial newspaper articles NYSE will be used without any indication that this is an organisation (the New York Stock Exchange). 
Limited gazetteers. The results so far sug- gest that the most useful gazetteers are those that contain very common names, names which the au- thors can expect their audience already to know about, rather than far-fetched examples of little known places or organisations. 

This suggests that it should be possible to tune a system to the kinds of Named Entities that oc-cur in its particular genre of text. To test this hypothesis, we wanted to know how the system would perform if it started with no gazetteers, started processing texts, then built up gazetteers as it goes along, and then uses these gazetteers on a new set of texts in the same domain. We sim- ulated these conditions by taking 30 of the 100 official MUC articles and extracting all the names of people, organisations and locations and using these as the only gazetteers, thereby ensuring that we had extracted Named Entities from articles in the same domain as the test domain. 
Since we wanted to test how easy it was to build gazetteers automatically, we wanted to minimise the amount of processing done on Named Enti- ties already found. We decided to only used first names of people, and marked them all as "likely" first names: the fact that "Bill" actually occurs as a first name does not guarantee it will definitely be a first name next time you see it. Company names found in the 30 articles were put in the company gazetteer, irrespective of whether they were full company names (e.g. "MCI Communications Cor- p" as well as "MCI" and "MCI Communication- s"). Names of locations found in the 30 texts were simply added to the list of 200 location names al- ready used in the previous experiments. 
The hope was that, despite the little effort in- volved in building these limited gazetteers, there would be an improved performance of the Named Entity recognition system. 
Figure 4 summarises the Precision and Recall results for each of these modes and confirms the hypotheses. 
6 Discussion 
The hypotheses were correct: without gazetteers the system still scores in the high eighties for names of orga~isations and people. Loca-tions come out badly. But even with a very small number of country names performance for those named entities also goes up into the mid- 
eighties. And simple techniques for extending the gazetteers on the basis of a sample of just 30 arti- cles already makes the system competitive again. 
These experiments suggest that the collection of gazetteers need not be a bottleneck: through a judicious use of internal and external evidence rel- atively small gazetteers are sufficient to give good Precision and Recall. In addition, when collecting these gazetteers one can concentrate on the obvi-ous examples of locations and organisations, since these are exactly the ones that will be introduced in texts without much helpful context. 
However, our experiments only show the useful- ness of gazetteers on a particular type of text, viz. journalistic English with mixed case. The rules as well as the maximum entropy models make use of internal and external evidence in that type of text when trying to identify named entities, and it is obvious that this system cannot be applied with- out modification to a different type of text, e.g. scientific articles. Without further formal eval- uations with externally supplied evaluation cor- pora it is difficult to judge how general this text type is. It is encouraging to note that Krupka and Hausman (1998) point out that the MUC-7 articles which we used in our experiments have less exter- nal evidence than do Wall Street Journal articles, which suggests that on Wall Street Journal arti- cles our system might perform even better than on MUC-7 articles. 
Acknowledgements 
The work reported in this paper was supported in part by grant GR/L21952 (Text Tokenisation Tool) from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, UK. We would like to thank Steve Finch and Irina Nazarova as well as Colin Matheson and other members of the Language Technology Group for help in building various tools and other resources that were used in the development of the MUC system. 
References 
Alessandro Cucchiarelli, Danilo Luzi, and Paola Velardi. 1998. Automatic semantic tagging of unknown proper names. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Compu-tational Linguistics, pages 286-292, Montr4al, Canada, August 10-14. 
George R. Krupka and Kevin Hausman. 1998. Isoquest, Inc: Description of the NetOwl(TM) extractor system as used for MUC-7. In 
Seventh Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7): Proceedings of a Conference held in Fairfax, Virginia, 29 April-1 May, 1998. 
http://www, muc. sale. com/proceedings/ 

muc_7_toc, html. 

George R. Krupka. 1995. Description of the SRA system as used for MUC-6. In Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6): Proceed-ings of a Conference ,~eld in Columbia, Mary- land, November 6-8, 1995, pages 221-235, Los Altos, Ca. Morgan Kaufmann. 
David D. McDonald. 1996. Internal and external evidence in the identification and semantic cat- egorization of proper names. In Bran Boguraev and James Pustejovsky, editors, Corpus Pro- cessing for Lexical Acquisition, chapter 2, pages 21-39. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Andrei Mikheev, Claire Grover, and Marc Moens. 1998. Description of the LTG system used for MUC-7. In Seventh Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7): Proceedings of a Con-ference held in Fairfax, Virginia, 29 April-1 May, 1998. http://w,r~.muc.saic.cota/ proceedings/muc_7_toc, html. 
Andrei Mikheev. 1998. Feature lattices for max- 
imum entropy modelling. In Proceedings of 

the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Compu-tational Linguistics, pages 848-854, Montreal, Quebec, August 10-14. 
Richard Morgan, Roberto Garigliano, Paul Callaghan, Sanjay Poria, Mark Smith, Ag-nieszka Urbanowicz, Russel Collingham, Marco Costantino, and Chris Cooper. 1995. Descrip- tion of the LOLITA system as used in MUC- 
6. In Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6): Proceedings of a Conference held in Columbia, Maryland, November 6-8, 1995, 
pages 71-86, Los Altos, Ca. Morgan Kaufmann. 
D. Palmer and D. Day. 1997. A statistical profile of the Named Entity task. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 190--193, Washington D.C. 
Beth Sundheim. 1995. Overview of results of the MUC-6 evaluation. In Sixth Message Un-derstanding Conference (MUC-6): Proceedings of a Conference held in Columbia, Maryland, November 6-8, 1995, pages 13-32, Los Altos, Ca. Morgan Kaufmann. 




