Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 631?640,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c?2013 Association for Computational Linguistics
Bootstrapping Entity Translation on Weakly Comparable Corpora
Taesung Lee and Seung-won Hwang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
Pohang, Republic of Korea
{elca4u, swhwang}@postech.edu
Abstract
This paper studies the problem of mining
named entity translations from compara-
ble corpora with some ?asymmetry?. Un-
like the previous approaches relying on the
?symmetry? found in parallel corpora, the
proposed method is tolerant to asymme-
try often found in comparable corpora, by
distinguishing different semantics of rela-
tions of entity pairs to selectively prop-
agate seed entity translations on weakly
comparable corpora. Our experimental
results on English-Chinese corpora show
that our selective propagation approach
outperforms the previous approaches in
named entity translation in terms of the
mean reciprocal rank by up to 0.16 for or-
ganization names, and 0.14 in a low com-
parability case.
1 Introduction
Identifying and understanding entities is a cru-
cial step in understanding text. This task is
more challenging in the presence of multilingual
text, because translating named entities (NEs),
such as persons, locations, or organizations, is
a non-trivial task. Early research on NE trans-
lation used phonetic similarities, for example,
to mine the translation ?Mandelson??????
??[ManDeErSen] with similar sounds. However,
not all NE translations are based on translitera-
tions, as shown in Table 1?Some translations,
especially the names of most organizations, are
based on semantic equivalences. Furthermore,
names can be abbreviated in one or both lan-
guages, e.g., the ?World Trade Organization? (?
?????) can be called the ?WTO? (???
?). Another challenging example is that, a trans-
lation can be arbitrary, e.g., ?Jackie Chan? ? ??
?? [ChengLong]. There are many approaches
English Chinese
World Trade
Organization
??????
[ShiJieMaoYiZuZhi]
WTO ???? [ShiMaoZuZhi]
Jackie Chan ?? [ChengLong]
Table 1: Examples of non-phonetic translations.
that deal with some of these challenges (Lam et
al., 2007; Yang et al, 2009), e.g., by combin-
ing phonetic similarity and a dictionary. How-
ever, arbitrary translations still cannot be handled
by examining the NE pair itself. Corpus-based ap-
proaches (Kupiec, 1993; Feng, 2004), by mining
external signals from a large corpus, such as par-
enthetical translation ??? (Jackie Chan)?, com-
plement the problem of transliteration-based ap-
proaches, but the coverage of this approach is lim-
ited to popular entities with such evidence.
The most effective known approach to NE
translation has been a holistic framework (You et
al., 2010; Kim et al, 2011; You et al, 2012) com-
bining transliteration- and corpus-based methods.
In these approaches, both 1) arbitrary translations
and 2) lesser-known entities can be handled, by
propagating the translation scores of known enti-
ties to lesser-known entities if they co-occur fre-
quently in both corpora. For example, a lesser-
known entity Tom Watson can be translated if
Mandelson and Tom Watson co-occur frequently
in an English corpus, and their Chinese transla-
tions also co-occur frequently in a Chinese corpus,
i.e., if the co-occurrences in the two corpora are
?symmetric?.
A research question we ask in this paper is:
What if comparable corpora are not comparable
enough to support this symmetry assumption? We
found that this is indeed the case. For exam-
ple, even English and Chinese news from the
same publisher may have different focus? the Chi-
nese version focuses more on Chinese Olympic
631
teams and Chinese local news. In the presence of
such asymmetry, all previous approaches, building
upon symmetry, quickly deteriorate by propagat-
ing false positives. For example, co-occurrence of
Mandelson and Tom Watson may not appear in a
Chinese corpus, which may lead to the translation
of Tom Watson into another Chinese entity Gor-
don Brown which happens to co-occur with the
Chinese translation of Mandelson.
Our key contribution is to avoid such false
propagation, by discerning the semantics of rela-
tions. For example, relations between Mandelson
and Tom Watson, should be semantically differ-
ent from Chinese relations between ???????
(Gordon Brown) and ?????? (Mandelson). A
naive approach would be finding documents with
a similar topic such as politics, and scientific dis-
covery, and allowing propagation only when the
topic agrees. However, we found that a topic is a
unit that is too coarse for this task because most
articles on Mandelson will invariably fall into the
same topic1. In clear contrast, we selectively prop-
agate seed translations, only when the relations in
the two corpora share the same semantics.
This selective propagation can be especially ef-
fective for translating challenging types of enti-
ties such as organizations including theWTO used
with and without abbreviation in both languages.
Applying a holistic approach (You et al, 2012)
on organizations leads to poor results, 0.06 in
terms of the F1-score. A naive approach to in-
crease the precision would be to consider multi-
type co-occurrences, hoping that highly precise
translations of some type, e.g., persons with an
F1-score of 0.69 (You et al, 2012), can be prop-
agated to boost the precision on organizations.
In our experiments, this naive multi-type prop-
agation still leads to an unsatisfactory F1-score
of 0.12. Such a low score can be explained by
the following example. When translating ?WTO?
using the co-occurrence with ?Mandelson?, other
co-occurrences such as (London, Mandelson) and
(EU, Mandelson) produce a lot of noise because
the right translation of WTO does not share much
phonetic/semantic similarity. Our understanding
of relation semantics, can distinguish ?Mandelson
was born in London? from ?Mandelson visited the
WTO?, to stop false propagations, which gener-
ates an F1-score 0.25 higher than the existing ap-
1The MRR for organization names achieved by a topic
model-based approach was 0.15 lower than our best.
proaches.
More formally, we enable selective propagation
of seed translations on weakly comparable cor-
pora, by 1) clarifying the detailed meaning of rela-
tional information of co-occurring entities, and 2)
identifying the contexts of the relational informa-
tion using statement-level context comparison. In
other words, we propagate the translation score of
a known translation pair to a neighbor pair if the
semantics of their relations in English and Chinese
corpora are equivalent to accurately propagate the
scores. For example, if we know ?Russia?????
??(1) and join???(2), then from a pair of state-
ments ?Russia(1) joins(2) theWTO(3)? and ????(1)
??(2) ????(3)?, we can propagate the trans-
lation score of (Russia, ???)(1) to (WTO, ?
???)(3). However, we do not exploit a pair of
statements ?Russia joined the WTO? and ????
??(2?) ???? because ??(2?) does not mean
join(2). Furthermore, we mine a similar English-
Chinese document pair that can be found by com-
paring the entity relationships, such as ?Mandel-
son visited Moscow? and ?Mandelson met Alexei
Kudrin?, within the English document and the
Chinese document to leverage similar contexts to
assure that we use symmetric parts.
For this goal, we first extract relations among
entities in documents, such as visit and join, and
mine semantically equivalent relations across the
languages, e.g., English and Chinese, such as
join???. Once these relation translations are
mined, similar document pairs can be identified
by comparing each constituent relationship among
entities using their relations. Knowing document
similarity improves NE translation, and improved
NE translation can boost the accuracy of document
and relationship similarity. This iterative process
can continue until convergence.
To the best of our knowledge, our approach is
the first to translate a broad range of multilin-
gual relations and exploit them to enhance NE
translation. In particular, our approach leverages
semantically similar document pairs to exclude
incomparable parts that appear in one language
only. Our method outperforms the previous ap-
proaches in translating NE up to 0.16 in terms of
the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) for organization
names. Moreover, our method shows robustness,
with 0.14 higher MRR than seed translations, on
less comparable corpora.
632
2 Related Work
This work is related to two research streams: NE
translation and semantically equivalent relation
mining.
Entity translation
Existing approaches on NE translation can be cat-
egorized into 1) transliteration-based, 2) corpus-
based, and 3) hybrid approaches.
Transliteration-based approaches (Wan and Ver-
spoor, 1998; Knight and Graehl, 1998) are the
foundations of many decent methods, but they
alone suffer from ambiguity (e.g., ??? and
??? have the same sounds) and cannot han-
dle non-transliterated cases such as ?Jackie Chan
(??[ChengLong])?. Some methods (Lam et al,
2007; Yang et al, 2009) rely on meanings of con-
stituent letters or words to handle organization
name translation such as ?Bank of China (??
??)?, whose translation is derived from ?China
(??)?, and ?a bank (??)?. However, many
names often originate from abbreviation (such as
?WTO?); hence we cannot always leverage mean-
ings.
Corpus-based approaches (Kupiec, 1993; Lin et
al., 2008; Jiang et al, 2009) exploit high-quality
bilingual evidence such as parenthetical transla-
tion, e.g., ??? (Jackie Chan)?, (Lin et al, 2008),
semi-structural patterns (Jiang et al, 2009), and
parallel corpus (Kupiec, 1993). However, the cov-
erage of the corpus-based approaches is limited to
popular entities with such bilingual evidences. On
the other hand, our method can cover entities with
monolingual occurrences in corpora, which signif-
icantly improves the coverage.
The most effective known approach is a holis-
tic framework that combines those two ap-
proaches (You et al, 2012; You et al, 2010; Kim
et al, 2011). You et al (2010; 2012) leverage two
graphs of entities in each language, that are gen-
erated from a pair of corpora, with edge weights
quantified as the strength of the relatedness of en-
tities. Then, two graphs are iteratively aligned us-
ing the common neighbors of two entities. Kim et
al. (2011) build such graphs using the context sim-
ilarity, measured with a bag of words approach, of
entities in news corpora to translate NEs. How-
ever, these approaches assume the symmetry of the
two graphs. This assumption holds if two corpora
are parallel, but such resources are scarce. But our
approach exploits comparable parts from corpora.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0 10 20 30 40 50
N
or
m
al
iz
ed
 O
cc
ur
re
nc
e
Weeks
WTO
????
Figure 1: Dissimilarity of temporal distributions
of ?WTO? in English and Chinese corpora.
Other interesting approaches such as (Klemen-
tiev and Roth, 2006; Kim et al, 2012) rely on tem-
poral distributions of entities. That is, two entities
are considered to be similar if the two entities in
different languages have similar occurrence distri-
butions over time. However, the effectiveness of
this feature also depends on the comparability of
entity occurrences in time-stamped corpora, which
may not hold as shown in Figure 1. In clear con-
trast, our method can find and compare articles,
on different dates, describing the same NE. More-
over, our method does not require time stamps.
Semantically similar relation mining
Recently, similar relation mining in one language
has been studied actively as a key part of automatic
knowledge base construction. In automatically
constructed knowledge bases, finding semanti-
cally similar relations can improve understanding
of the Web describing content with many different
expressions. As such an effort, PATTY (Nakas-
hole et al, 2012) finds similar relations with al-
most the same support sets?the sets of NE pairs
that co-occur with the relations. However, because
of the regional locality of information, bilingual
corpora contain many NE pairs that appear in only
one of the support sets of the semantically identi-
cal relations. NELL (Mohamed et al, 2011) finds
related relations using seed pairs of one given re-
lation; then, using K-means clustering, it finds re-
lations that are semantically similar to the given
relation. Unfortunately, this method requires that
we set K manually, and extract relations for each
given relation. Therefore, this is unsuitable to sup-
port general relations.
There are only few works on translating rela-
tions or obtaining multi-lingual similar relations.
Schone et al (2011) try to find relation patterns
633
in multiple languages for given seed pairs of a re-
lation. Because this approach finds seed pairs in
Wikipedia infoboxes, the number of retrievable re-
lations is restricted to five. Kim et al (2010) seek
more diverse types of relations, but it requires par-
allel corpora, which are scarce.
3 Framework Overview
In this section, we provide an overview of our
framework for translating NEs, using news cor-
pora in English and Chinese as a running example.
Because such corpora contain asymmetric parts,
the goal of our framework is to overcome asym-
metry by distinguishing the semantics of relations,
and leveraging document context defined by the
relations of entities.
(e) Iteration on ?? ????? ? ???  
(Section 4.5) 
(c) Relation 
Translation ? ? 
(Section 4.3) 
(d) Statement-Level 
Document Context 
Comparison ?? 
(Section 4.4) 
(b) Seed Entity 
Translation ? ??  
(Section 4.2) 
Iterative process 
English 
Corpus 
Chinese 
Corpus 
(a) Statement Extraction 
(Section 4.1) 
Figure 2: Framework overview.
For this purpose, we build a mutual bootstrap-
ping framework (Figure 2), between entity trans-
lation and relation translation using extracted re-
lationships of entities (Figure 2 (a), Section 4.1).
More formally, we use the following process:
1. Base condition (Figure 2 (a), Section 4.2): Ini-
tializing T (1)N (eE , eC), a seed entity translation
score, where eE is an English entity, and eC is
a Chinese entity. T (1)N can be initialized by pho-
netic similarity or other NE translation methods.
2. Iteration: Obtaining T t+1N using T tN .
1) Using T tN , we obtain a set of relation
translations with a semantic similarity score,
T tR(rE , rC), for an English relation rE and a
Chinese relation rC (Figure 2 (b), Section 4.3)
(e.g., rE =visit and rC =??).
2) Using T tN and T tR, we identify a set of seman-
tically similar document pairs that describe the
same event with a similarity score T tD(dE , dC)
where dE is an English document and dC is a
Chinese document (Figure 2 (c), Section 4.4).
3) Using T tN , T tR and T tD, we compute T t+1N , an
improved entity translation score (Figure 2 (d),
Section 4.5).
Each sub-goal reinforces the result of others in
the (t + 1)-th iteration, and by iteratively running
them, we can improve the quality of translations.
Note that, hereinafter, we omit (t) for readability
when there is no ambiguity.
4 Methods
In this section, we describe our method in de-
tail. First, we explain how we extract statements,
which are units of relational information, from
documents in Section 4.1, and how we obtain seed
name translations in Section 4.2. Next, we present
our method for discovering relation translations
across languages in Section 4.3. In Section 4.4, we
use the name translations and the relation trans-
lations to compare document contexts which can
boost the precision of NE translation. In Sec-
tion 4.5, we describe how we use the resources
obtained so far to improve NE translation.
4.1 Statement Extraction
We extract relational statements, which we exploit
to propagate translation scores, from an English
news corpus and a Chinese news corpus. A rela-
tional statement, or simply a statement is a triple
(x, r, y), representing a relationship between two
names, x and y. For example, from ?Mandel-
son recently visited Moscow,? we obtain this state-
ment: (Mandelson, visit, Moscow). We follow a
standard procedure to extract statements, as sim-
ilarly adopted by Nakashole et al (2012), using
Stanford CoreNLP (Klein and Manning, 2003) to
lemmatize and parse sentences. Here, we refer
readers to existing work for further details because
this is not our key contribution.
4.2 Seed Entity Translation
We need a few seed translation pairs to initi-
ate the framework. We build a seed transla-
tion score T (1)N (eE , eC) indicating the similar-
ity of an English entity eE and a Chinese en-
tity eC using an existing method. For exam-
ple, most methods would give high value for
634
T (1)N (Mandelson,???? [ManDeErSen]). In this
work, we adopted (You et al, 2012) with (Lam
et al, 2007) as a base translation matrix to build
the seed translation function. We also use a dictio-
nary to obtain non-NE translations such as ?gov-
ernment?. We use an English-Chinese general
word dictionary containing approximately 80,000
English-Chinese translation word pairs that was
also used by Kim et al (2011) to measure the sim-
ilarity of context words of entities.
4.3 Relation Translation
We need to identify relations that have the equiv-
alent semantics across languages, (e.g., visit??
?), to enable selective propagation of translation
scores. Formally, our goal is to measure a pair-
wise relation translation score TR(rE , rC) for an
English relation rE ? RE and a Chinese relation
rC ? RC whereRE is a set of all English relations
and RC is a set of all Chinese relations.
We first explain a basic feature to measure the
similarity of two relations, its limitations, and how
we address the problems. A basic clue is that re-
lations of the same meaning are likely to be men-
tioned with the same entity pairs. For example,
if we have (Mandelson, visit, Moscow) as well as
(Mandelson, head to, Moscow) in the corpus, this
is a positive signal that the two relations may share
the same meaning. Such NE pairs are called sup-
port pairs of the two relations.
We formally define this clue for relations in the
same language, and then describe that in the bilin-
gual setting. A support intersection Hm(ri, rj), a
set of support pairs, for monolingual relations ri
and rj is defined as
Hm(ri, rj) = H(ri) ?H(rj) (1)
where H(r) is the support set of a relation r de-
fined as H(r) = {(x, y)|(x, r, y) ? S}, and S is
either SE , a set of all English statements, or SC , a
set of all Chinese statements that we extracted in
Section 4.1.
Likewise, we can define a support intersection
for relations in the different languages using the
translation score TN (eE , eC). For an English rela-
tion rE and a Chinese relation rC ,
Hb(rE , rC) ={(xE , xC , yE , yC)|
TN (xE , xC) ? ?
and TN (yE , yC) ? ?
for (xE , rE , yE) ? SE
and (xC , rC , yC) ? SC}
(2)
where ? = 0.6 is a harsh threshold to exclude most
of the false translations by TN .
Finally, we define a support intersection, a set
of support pairs between two relations ri and rj of
any languages,
H(ri, rj) =
?
??
??
Hb(ri, rj) if ri ? RE and rj ? RC
Hb(rj , ri) if rj ? RE and ri ? RC
Hm(ri, rj) otherwise
(3)
Intuitively, |H(ri, rj)| indicates the strength of
the semantic similarity of two relations ri and
rj of any languages. However, as shown in Ta-
ble 2, we cannot use this value directly to mea-
sure the similarity because the support intersection
of semantically similar bilingual relations (e.g.,
|H(head to,??)| = 2) is generally very low,
and normalization cannot remedy this problem
as we can see from |H(visit,??)| = 27 and
|H(visit)| = 1617.
Set Cardinality
H(visit) 1617
H(??) 2788
H(visit,??) 27
H(head to,??) 2
Table 2: Evidence cardinality in the corpora.
?? 
visit 
head to 
call on 
denounce 
criticize 
blame 
ask 
request appeal to 
fly to 
8 
2 
1 
1 
2 4 
Figure 3: Network of relations. Edges indicate
that the relations have a non-empty support inter-
section, and edge labels show the size of the inter-
section.
We found that the connectivity among similar
relations is more important than the strength of
the similarity. For example, as shown in Figure 3,
visit is connected to most of the visit-relations
such as head to, ??. Although visit is con-
nected to criticize, visit is not connected to other
criticize-relations such as denounce and blame,
whereas criticize, denounce, and blame are inter-
635
?? 
visit 
head to 
visit-cluster 
denounce 
criticize 
blame      criticize-cluster 
call on 
10 
6 
fly to 
2 
call on ask 
request appeal to request-cluster 
Figure 4: Relation clusters and a few individual
relations. Edge labels show the size of the inter-
section.
connected. To exploit this feature, we use a ran-
dom walk-based graph clustering method.
Formally, we use Markov clustering (Van Don-
gen, 2000) on a graph G = (V,E) of relations,
where V = RE ? RC is a set of all English and
Chinese relations. An edge (ri, rj) indicates that
two relations in any languages are similar, and its
weight is quantified by a sigmoid function on a
linear transformation of |H(ri, rj)| that was em-
pirically found to produce good results.
Each resultant cluster forms a set of bilingual
similar relations, c = {rc1 , ..., rcM }, such as visit-
cluster, which consists of visit, head to, and??
in Figure 4. However, this cluster may not contain
all similar relations. A relation may have multi-
ple meanings (e.g., call on) so it can be clustered
to another cluster, or a relation might not be clus-
tered when its support set is too small (e.g., fly
to). For such relations, rather than assigning zero
similarity to visit-relations, we compute a cluster
membership function based on support pairs of the
cluster members and the target relation, and then
formulate a pairwise relation translation score.
Formally, we learn the membership function
of a relation r to a cluster c using support vec-
tor regression (Joachims, 1999) with the follow-
ing features based on the support set of cluster c,
H(c) = ?r?c H(r), and the support intersection
of r and c, H(r, c) = ?r??c H(r, r?).
? f1(r, c) = |H(r, c)|/|H(r)|: This quantifies the
degree of inclusion, H(c) ? H(r).
? f2(r, c) = |H(r, c)|/|H(c)|: This quantifies the
degree of inclusion, H(r) ? H(c).
? f3(r, c) = |Hwithin(r, c)|/|Hwithin(c)|: This is a
variation of f2 that considers only noun phrase
pairs shared at least once by relations in c.
? f4(r, c) = |Hwithin(r, c)|/|Hshared(c)|: This is a
variation of f2 that considers only noun phrase
pairs shared at least once by any pair of relations.
? f5(r, c) = |{r? ? c|H(r, r?) > 0}|/|c|: This
is the degree of connectivity to the cluster mem-
bers.
where Hwithin(r, c) = ?r??c H(r, c) ? H(r, r?),
the intersection, considering translation, of H(r)
and noun phrase pairs shared at once by rela-
tions in c, Hwithin(c) = ?r??c H(r?, c ? {r?}),
and Hshared(c) = ?r??RE?RC H(r?, c), the nounphrase pairs shared at once by any relations. The
use of Hwithin and Hshared is based on the obser-
vation that a noun phrase pair that appear in only
one relation tends to be an incorrectly chunked en-
tity such as ?World Trade? from the ?World Trade
Organization?.
Based on this membership function S(r, c), we
compute pairwise relation similarity. We consider
that two relations are similar if they have at least
one cluster that the both relations belong to, which
can be measured with S(r, c). More formally,
pairwise similarity of relations ri and rj is defined
as
TR(ri, rj) = maxc?C S(r
i, c) ? S(rj , c) (4)
where C is a set of all clusters.
4.4 Statement-level Document Context
Comparison
A brute-force statement matching approach often
fails due to ambiguity created by ignoring con-
text, and missing information in TN or TR. There-
fore, we detect similar document pairs to boost
the statement matching process. Unlike the pre-
vious approaches (e.g., bag-of-words), we focus
on the relationships of entities within documents
using the extracted statements.
Formally, we compute the similarity of two
statements sE = (xE , rE , yE) and sC =
(xC , rC , yC) in different languages as follows:
TS(sE , sC) = TN (xE , xC)TR(rE , rC)TN (yE , yC)
(5)
With this definition, we can find similar statements
described with different vocabularies in different
languages.
To compare a document pair, we use the fol-
lowing equation to measure the similarity of an
636
English document diE and a Chinese document djC
based on their statements SiE and SjC , respectively:
TD(diE , djC) =
?
(sE ,sC)?B TS(s
i,r
E , s
j,r
C )
|SiE |+ |SiE | ? |B|
(6)
whereB ? SiE?SjC is a greedy approximate solu-
tion of maximum bipartite matching (West, 1999)
on a bipartite graph GB = (VB = (SiE , SjC), EB)
with edge weights that are defined by TS . The
maximum bipartite matching finds a subset of
edges in SiE ? SjC that maximize the sum of the
selected edge weights and that do not share a node
as their anchor point.
4.5 Iteration on TN
In this section, we describe how we use the state-
ment similarity function TS , and the document
similarity function TD to improve and derive the
next generation entity translation function T (t+1)N .
We consider that a pair of an English entity eE and
a Chinese entity eC are likely to indicate the same
real world entity if they have 1) semantically sim-
ilar relations to the same entity 2) under the same
context. Formally, we define an increment func-
tion as follows.
?TN (eE , eC)=
?
diE
?
djC
TD(di, dj) max
(sE ,sC)?B?
TS(sE , sC)
(7)
whereB? is a subset ofB ? SiE?SjC such that the
connected statements mention eE and eC , andB is
the greedy approximate solution of maximum bi-
partite matching for the set SiE of statements of diE
and the set SjC of statements of djC . In other words,
B? is a set of matching statement pairs mention-
ing the translation target eE and eC in the docu-
ment pair. Then, we use the following equation to
improve the original entity translation function.
T (t+1)N (eE , eC) = (1? ?)
?TN (eE , eC)?
e?C
?TN (eE , e?C)
+ ?TN (eE , eC) (8)
where ? is a mixing parameter in [0, 1]. We set
? = 0.6 in our experiments.
With this update, we obtain the improved NE
translations considering the relations that an en-
tity has to other entities under the same context to
achieve higher precision.
5 Experiments
In this section, we present experimental settings
and results of translating entity names using our
methods compared with several baselines.
5.1 Data and Evaluation
We processed news articles for an entire year in
2008 by Xinhua news who publishes news in
both English and Chinese, which were also used
by Kim et al (2011) and Shao and Ng (2004). The
English corpus consists of 100,746 news articles,
and the Chinese corpus consists of 88,031 news
articles. The news corpora are not parallel but
comparable corpora, with asymmetry of entities
and relationship as the asymmetry in the number
of documents also suggest. Examples of such lo-
cality in Xinhua news include the more extensive
coverage of Chinese teams in the Olympics and
domestic sports in the Chinese news. Our frame-
work finds and leverages comparable parts from
the corpora without document-content-external in-
formation such as time stamps. We also show that,
under the decreasing comparability, our method
retains higher MRR than the baselines.
We follow the evaluation procedures used
by You et al (2012) and Kim et al (2011) to
fairly and precisely compare the effectiveness of
our methods with baselines. To measure perfor-
mance, we use mean reciprocal rank (MRR) to
evaluate a translation function T :
MRR(T ) = 1|Q|
?
(u,v)?Q
1
rankT (u, v)
(9)
where Q is the set of gold English-Chinese trans-
lation pairs (u, v) and rankT (u, v) is the rank of
T (u, v) in {T (u,w)|w is a Chinese entity}. In ad-
dition, we use precision, recall, and F1-score.
As gold translation pairs, we use the evaluation
data used by You et al (2012) with additional la-
bels, especially for organizations. The labeling
task is done by randomly selecting English enti-
ties and finding their Chinese translation from the
Chinese corpus. We only use entities with trans-
lations that appear in the Chinese corpus. We
present the evaluation results for persons and or-
ganizations to show the robustness of the meth-
ods. In total, we identified 490 English entities in
the English news with Chinese translations in the
Chinese news. Among the 490 entities, 221 NEs
are persons and 52 NEs are organizations.
637
Person Organization
MRR P. R. F1 MRR P. R. F1
T (2)N 0.80 0.81 0.79 0.80 0.53 0.56 0.52 0.54
T (1)N 0.77 0.80 0.77 0.78 0.44 0.49 0.44 0.46
TSPH+P 0.73 0.70 0.67 0.69 0.14 0.17 0.04 0.06
TMPH+P 0.68 0.70 0.68 0.69 0.08 0.31 0.08 0.12
THB 0.71 0.59 0.59 0.59 0.37 0.29 0.29 0.29
TDict 0.09 1.00 0.09 0.17 0.17 1.00 0.17 0.30
Table 3: Evaluation results of the methods.
5.2 Baselines
We compare our methods with the following base-
lines.
? TSPH+P (You et al, 2012) is a holistic method
that uses a transliteration method as base
translations, and then reinforces them to
achieve higher quality. This method uses
only a single type of entities to propagate the
translation scores.
? TMPH+P is the holistic method revised to use
naive multi-type propagation that uses multi-
ple types of entities to reinforce the transla-
tion scores.
? THB is a linear combination of transliteration
and semantic translation methods (Lam et al,
2007) tuned to achieve the highest MRR.
? TDict is a dictionary-only method. This dic-
tionary is used by both THB and TN .
Only the translation pairs of scores above 0.35
are used for TPH+P to maximize the F1-score to
measure precision, recall and F1-score. For our
method T (t)N , we use the result with (t) = 1,
the seed translations, and (t) = 2, which means
that only one pass of the whole framework is per-
formed to improve the seed translation function.
In addition, we use translation pairs with scores
above 0.05 to measure precision, recall, and F1-
score. Note that these thresholds do not affect
MRRs.
5.3 NE Translation Results
We show the result of the quantitative evaluation
in Table 3, where the highest values are boldfaced,
except TDict which shows 1.00 precision because
it is a manually created dictionary. For both the
person and organization cases, our method T (2)N
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms
English
name
T (2)N T
(1)
N THB
Mandelson ????
[ManDeErSen]
????
[ManDeErSen]
????
[ManDeErSen]
WTO ????
[ShiMaoZuZhi]
????
[ShangHeZuZhi]
????
[BaJieZuZhi]
White House ??
[BaiGong]
??
[JiaZhou]
??
[JiaZhou]
Microsoft ????
[WeiRuanGongSi]
?????
[MeiGuoSiFaBu]
????
[MiLuoNuoFu]
Table 4: Example translations from the different
methods. Boldface indicates correct translations.
0.4
0.6
0.8
D0 D1 D2
t=2
t=1??? ??? 
Figure 6: MRR with decreasing comparability.
of precision, recall, F1-score and MRR. With only
one iteration of selective propagation, the seed
translation is improved to achieve the 0.09 higher
MRR.
The baselines show lower, but comparable
MRRs and F1-scores for persons that mostly con-
sist of transliterated cases. However, not all trans-
lations have phonetic similarity, especially orga-
nization names, as the low F1-score of TSPH+P ,
0.06, for organizations suggests. The naive multi-
type propagation TMPH+P shows decreased MRR
for both persons and organizations compared to
the single-type propagation TSPH+P , which shows
a negative influence of diverse relation semantics
of entities of different types. THB achieves a bet-
ter MRR than TPH+P due to the semantic transla-
tion of organization names. However, despite the
increased recall of THB over that of TDict, the pre-
cision of THB is unsatisfactory because THB maps
abbreviated names such as ?WTO? with other NEs.
On the other hand, our method achieves the high-
est MRR and precision in both the person and or-
ganization categories.
As shown in Table 4, THB translates ?WTO? in-
accurately, linking it to an incorrect organization
?????? (Palestine Liberation Organization).
638
The European Union (EU) Trade Commissioner (1) Peter Mandelson traveled to Moscow on 
Thursday for talks on ? Mandelson said it is a priority to see (2) Russia join the WTO, ? 
?????? (1) ??????14????????, ??????????????, 
(2) ?????????????????????, ? 
(Peter Mandelson, traveled to, Moscow) 
(??????, ????, ???) 
(Russia, join, WTO) 
(???, ??, ????) 
1) 2) 
Figure 5: Example of similar document pairs.
Moreover, the use of the corpora by T (1)N could
not fix this problem, and it finds another organi-
zation related to trade, ?????? (Shanghai Co-
operation Organization). In contrast, our selective
propagation method T (2)N , which uses the wrong
seed translation by T (1)N , ?????? (Shang-
hai Cooperation Organization), successfully trans-
lates the WTO using statements such as (Russia,
join, WTO), and its corresponding Chinese state-
ment (???, ??, ????). Similarly, both
the baseline THB and the seed translation T (1)N
matched Microsoft to incorrect Chinese entities
that are phonetically similar as indicated by the
underlined text. In contrast, T (2)N finds the correct
translation despite the phonetic dissimilarity.
5.4 NE Translation Results with Low Corpus
Comparability
We tested the methods using less comparable data
to evaluate the robustness with the following de-
rived datasets:
? D0:All news articles are used.
? D1: January-December English and July-
December Chinese articles are used.
? D2:April-September English and July-
December Chinese articles are used.
Figure 6 shows the MRR comparisons of our
method T (2)N and T (1)N on all test entities. Be-
cause the commonly appearing NEs are decreas-
ing, the performance decline is inevitable. How-
ever, we can see that the MRR of the seed trans-
lation method drops significantly on D1 and D2,
whereas our method shows 0.14 higher MRR for
both cases.
5.5 Similar Documents
In this section, we show an example of similar
documents in Figure 5. Both articles describe
the same event about the visit of Mandelson to
Moscow for the discussion on the joining of Rus-
sia to the WTO. The extracted statements are the
exact translations of each corresponding part as in-
dicated by the arrows. We stress this is an extreme
case for illustration, where the two sentences are
almost an exact translation, except for a minor
asymmetry involving the date (Thursday in En-
glish, and 14th in Chinese). In most similar doc-
uments, the asymmetry is more significant. The
seed translation score T 1N (WTO,????) is not
enough to match the entities. However, the context
similarity, due to other similar statements such as
(1), allows us to match (2). This match helps trans-
lation of ?WTO? by inspecting the organization
that Russia considers to join in both documents.
6 Conclusions
This paper proposed a bootstrapping approach
for entity translation using multilingual relational
clustering. Further, the proposed method could
finds similar document pairs by comparing state-
ments to enable us to focus on comparable parts of
evidence. We validated the quality of our approach
using real-life English and Chinese corpora, and
its performance significantly exceeds that of pre-
vious approaches.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported by the MKE (The
Ministry of Knowledge Economy), Korea and Mi-
crosoft Research, under IT/SW Creative research
program supervised by the NIPA (National IT In-
dustry Promotion Agency). (NIPA-2012-H0503-
12-1036).
639
References
Donghui Feng. 2004. A new approach for english-
chinese named entity alignment. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing EMNLP, pages 372?379.
Long Jiang, Shiquan Yang, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu,
and Qingsheng Zhu. 2009. Mining bilingual data
from the web with adaptively learnt patterns. In
Joint Conference of the ACL and the IJCNLP, pages
870?878, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
T. Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM learning
practical. In B. Scho?lkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola,
editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vec-
tor Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Seokhwan Kim, Minwoo Jeong, Jonghoon Lee, and
Gary Geunbae Lee. 2010. A cross-lingual anno-
tation projection approach for relation detection. In
COLING, pages 564?571, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Jinhan Kim, Long Jiang, Seung-won Hwang, Young-In
Song, and Ming Zhou. 2011. Mining entity trans-
lations from comparable corpora: a holistic graph
mapping approach. In CIKM, pages 1295?1304,
New York, NY, USA.
Jinhan Kim, Seung won Hwang, Long Jiang, Young-
In Song, and Ming Zhou. 2012. Entity transla-
tion mining from comparable corpora: Combining
graph mapping with corpus latent features. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
99(PrePrints).
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ?03, pages 423?
430, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Alexandre Klementiev and Dan Roth. 2006. Named
entity transliteration and discovery from multilin-
gual comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the
main conference on Human Language Technol-
ogy Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association of Computational Linguistics, HLT-
NAACL ?06, pages 82?88, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kevin Knight and Jonathan Graehl. 1998. Machine
transliteration. Comput. Linguist., 24(4):599?612,
December.
Julian Kupiec. 1993. An algorithm for finding noun
phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. In
ACL, pages 17?22, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Wai Lam, Shing-Kit Chan, and Ruizhang Huang.
2007. Named entity translation matching and learn-
ing: With application for mining unseen transla-
tions. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 25(1), February.
Dekang Lin, Shaojun Zhao, Benjamin Van Durme, and
Marius Pasca. 2008. Mining parenthetical transla-
tions from the web by word alignment. In ACL.
Thahir Mohamed, Estevam Hruschka, and Tom
Mitchell. 2011. Discovering relations between
noun categories. In EMNLP, pages 1447?1455, Ed-
inburgh, Scotland, UK., July.
Ndapandula Nakashole, Gerhard Weikum, and
Fabian M. Suchanek. 2012. PATTY: A Taxonomy
of Relational Patterns with Semantic Types. In
EMNLP.
Patrick Schone, Tim Allison, Chris Giannella, and
Craig Pfeifer. 2011. Bootstrapping multilin-
gual relation discovery using english wikipedia and
wikimedia-induced entity extraction. In ICTAI,
pages 944?951, Washington, DC, USA.
Li Shao and Hwee Tou Ng. 2004. Mining new word
translations from comparable corpora. In COLING,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
S. Van Dongen. 2000. Graph Clustering by Flow Sim-
ulation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
Stephen Wan and Cornelia Maria Verspoor. 1998. Au-
tomatic english-chinese name transliteration for de-
velopment of multilingual resources. In ACL, pages
1352?1356, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Douglas Brent West. 1999. Introduction to graph the-
ory (2nd edition). Prentice Hall.
Fan Yang, Jun Zhao, and Kang Liu. 2009. A chinese-
english organization name translation system using
heuristic web mining and asymmetric alignment. In
Joint Conference of the ACL and the IJCNLP, pages
387?395, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Gae-won You, Seung-won Hwang, Young-In Song,
Long Jiang, and Zaiqing Nie. 2010. Mining name
translations from entity graph mapping. In EMNLP,
pages 430?439, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Gae-Won You, Seung-Won Hwang, Young-In Song,
Long Jiang, and Zaiqing Nie. 2012. Efficient entity
translation mining: A parallelized graph alignment
approach. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 30(4):25:1?25:23,
November.
640
