Constructions with Lexical Integrity

Ash Asudeh†‡, Mary Dalrymple‡, and Ida Toivonen†
‡Carleton University & ‡ University of Oxford

November 24, 2012



Abstract

Construction Grammar holds that unpredictable form-meaning combinations are not restricted in size. 
In particular, there may be phrases that have particular meanings that are not predictable from the words 
that they contain, but which are nonetheless not purely idiosyncratic. In addressing this observation, 
some construction grammarians have not only weakened the word/phrase distinction, but also denied 
the lexicon/grammar distinction. In this paper, we consider the word/phrase and lexicon/grammar dis- 
tinction in light of Lexical-Functional Grammar and its Lexical Integrity Principle.  We show that it 
is not necessary to remove the words/phrases distinction or the lexicon/grammar distinction to capture 
constructional effects, although we agree that there are important generalisations involving construc- 
tions of all sizes that must be captured at both syntactic and semantic levels. We use LFG’s templates, 
bundles of grammatical descriptions, to factor out grammatical information in such a way that it can be 
invoked either by words or by construction-specific phrase structure rules. Phrase structure rules that 
invoke specific templates are thus the equivalent of phrasal constructions in our approach, but Lexi- 
cal Integrity and the separation of word and phrase are preserved. Constructional effects are captured 
by systematically allowing words and phrases to contribute comparable information to LFG’s level of 
functional structure; this is just a generalization of LFG’s usual assumption that “morphology competes 
with syntax” (Bresnan 2001).


1   Words, constructions, and the lexicon

The observation that unpredictable form-meaning combinations are not restricted in size forms the basis 
for Construction Grammar (Fillmore 1988, Fillmore et al. 1988, Kay and Fillmore 1999, Goldberg 1995,
2006, Goldberg and Jackendoff 2004, Michaelis 2010, Sag 2010, Boas and Sag 2012).1   A meaning that
is associated with a word or a part of a word may also be associated with a phrasal structure in the same 
language, or in another language. Construction Grammar takes the structure and organisation of the col- 
lection of listemes/constructions as crucially important, and a central concern is the study of the relations 
among constructions: this contrasts with Di Sciullo and Williams (1987), who consider the collection of 
listemes to be unstructured and the study of the relations among listemes uninteresting. Examples such as 
(1-3) involve correspondences between phrasal structures and idiosyncratic meanings; the syntactic frame 
of the multi-word expression itself, perhaps along with some specifications on what words are permitted, 
evokes some interpretation.
(1)          The bigger the better. (Fillmore et al. 1988, Culicover and Jackendoff 1999)

(2)	What’s that koala doing sleeping in the corner? (the ‘What’s X doing Y’ construction: Kay and
Fillmore 1999)

(3)          Smithy drank his way through university. (Jackendoff 1990, Goldberg 1995)

  1 See Sag et al. (2012) for a historical overview of Construction Grammar and further references. See Sag (2012) for an informal 
overview of a formal theory of Construction Grammar (Sign-Based Construction Grammar).






Most words in the expressions above are exchangeable for other words, so they seem more flexible than 
prototypical idioms. Yet their form and associated interpretation must be learned by English speakers, as 
these constructions do not, it is argued, follow from general compositional principles of English grammar. 
On the Construction Grammar view, such expressions are not a peripheral part of the grammar which need 
not be accounted for in grammatical theory; instead, they lie at one end of a continuum of structures re- 
lating forms to meanings.  Constructions as pairings of form and meaning can be larger or smaller than 
a word, and can have more or less general or predictable structure and meaning. Following on from this 
view, Construction Grammarians have denied the utility of a strict division between word-internal gram- 
matical regularities and phrasal regularities, or between semantically bleached grammatical structures and 
structures which contribute specialised or irregular meaning. As a consequence, Construction Grammari- 
ans have tended to emphasise commonalities across types of constructions rather than differences, and to 
de-emphasise differences between word-level and phrase-level constructions.
   Indeed, some advocates of Construction Grammar have gone even further and claimed that the distinc- 
tion between lexicon and grammar is no longer useful, as illustrated by the following quotes:

[M]orphemes are clear instances of constructions in that they are pairings of meaning and form 
that are not predictable from anything else. It is a consequence of this definition that the lexicon 
is not neatly differentiated from the rest of grammar. (Goldberg 1995:4)

In Construction Grammar, no strict division is assumed between the lexicon and syntax. (Gold- 
berg 1995:7)

Every theory of language has to take a word to be a complex of phonological, syntactic, and 
semantic structures; commonly, the store of words is called the lexicon. . . . Aspects [(Chom- 
sky 1965)] treats the lexicon as a component of language distinct from the rules of grammar. 
Words are taken to be the locus of irregularity in language, while rules of grammar encode 
all the regularities. Words get into sentences by being inserted into syntactic derivation, at the 
point when syntactic trees are being built and before trees begin to be manipulated and fed to 
phonology and semantics. . . . But while [this view of the lexicon] was altogether plausible in 
the context of early work in generative grammar, I believe that subsequent developments re- 
veal it as another major mistake that has remained in the background as unquestionable dogma 
within the mainstream school of thought. (Jackendoff 2007:53)

It is also telling that the section that contains this last quote is titled “Another Fundamental Mistake: The
Lexicon/Grammar Distinction”.
   Another perspective on this fundamental issue arises if we ask whether it there is any necessary theo- 
retical distinction between words and phrases. Many linguists agree that words and phrases must be distin- 
guished (Anderson 1992, Aronoff 1993, Sadler and Spencer 2000, Stump 2001, Blevins 2006), though the 
word/phrase distinction is denied by some linguists, not just some working in Construction Grammar, but 
also those working within the Distributed Morphology paradigm (Halle and Marantz 1993, 1994, Marantz
1997, Siddiqi 2009), which otherwise has quite different morphosyntactic assumptions.
   We believe that there is a fundamental reason to maintain the distinction between words and phrases 
that has previously gone unaddressed in the literature. It has been shown (Shieber 1985) that natural lan- 
guage syntax falls in the class of mildly context-sensitive languages (Joshi et al. 1991, Vijay-Shanker and 
Weir 1994), whereas natural language morphology falls within the generatively weaker class of regular 
languages (see Beesley and Karttunen 2003 and references therein). If the full computational power of the 
syntactic system underlies morphology, this formally well-understood fundamental distinction is entirely 
unexplained. From an alternative, empirical perspective one can ask the following question: if morphology






has the full power of syntax, why are there no clear morphological equivalents of unbounded dependen- 
cies? Challenging non-concatenative morphological phenomena, such as circumfixion and root-and-pattern 
morphology, can be characterized by regular means (Beesley and Karttunen 2000, 2003). Even total redu- 
plication can be characterized without going outside the regular languages (Beesley and Karttunen 2000). 
It is of course possible that morphology does have the full expressive power of syntax, but we simply 
have not yet come across languages with unbounded morphological dependencies. However, this would be 
surprising, given that unbounded dependencies are syntactically prevalent.
   In this paper, we will show that it is not necessary to remove the words/phrases distinction or the lexi- 
con/grammar distinction to capture constructional effects, although we agree that there are important gener- 
alisations involving constructions of all sizes that must be captured at both grammatical and semantic levels. 
In keeping with much other work in Lexical Functional Grammar (see particularly Bresnan 2001: Chap- 
ter 6), we believe that the proper grammatical level for characterising similarities across constructions is 
a level like LFG’s functional structure (f-structure), which represents abstract syntactic relations such as 
subject, object, and adjunct, as well as syntactic features such as person, number, gender, case, tense, and 
aspect. In contrast, the constituent structure (c-structure) tree encodes word order and phrasal dominance 
and grouping, and is the level at which the difference between words and phrases is represented, in keeping 
with the Lexical Integrity Principle. As Bresnan (2001:93) observes, “... LFG’s lexical integrity principle 
implies that while morphemic words and syntactic phrases are different types of forms of expression in c- 
structure, they may carry the same types of information in f-structure. In other words, these different forms 
of expression — words and phrases — may be functionally equivalent (in terms of f-structure content).”
   An early statement of Lexical Integrity was provided by Simpson (1983:74): 
(4)	Lexical Integrity (Simpson 1983:74)
No constituent structure rule may order any element into or out of lexical categories such as N, A,
       V. That is, constituent structure rules are blind to the internal structure of lexical categories. 
Subsequent work within LFG has adopted Lexical Integrity as a fundamental principle differentiating word- 
internal structure from phrasal syntax, as in (5), and establishing words as indivisible, undecomposable units
at c-structure as in (6):
(5)          Lexical Integrity (Bresnan and Mchombo 1995:181)
Words are built out of different structural elements and by different principles of composition than 
syntactic phrases.

(6)          Lexical Integrity (Bresnan 2001:93)
Morphologically complete words are leaves of the c[onstituent]-structure tree and each leaf cor- 
responds to one and only one c[onstituent]-structure node.

In a series of papers, Booij (2005a,b, 2009) provides substantial evidence for the Lexical Integrity Principle 
from a Construction Grammar viewpoint. His observations are an excellent fit with the LFG view of Lexical 
Integrity, which assumes that syntactic rules have access to certain (f-structural) aspects of word-internal 
structure, but not to other (c-structural) aspects.
   The c-structure/f-structure distinction is crucial to the LFG-theoretic understanding of the Strong Lex- 
icalist Hypothesis, which is essentially what Lexical Integrity captures. The Strong Lexicalist Hypothesis 
states that syntactic rules of phrase formation cannot access any parts of words. This is a generalization of 
the Weak Lexicalist Hypothesis, which states that syntactic rules cannot access derivational morphology, 
but allows access to inflectional morphology. Marantz (1997) has argued that lexicalism is untenable based 
on the view that morphology can make complex syntactic contributions; this is the foundational doctrine 
of Distributed Morphology.  However, although Marantz (1997) has often been taken as arguing against 
lexicalism tout court, his arguments actually depend on his particular conception of syntax, which does not 
distinguish constituent structure from functional structure.






   Lexical Integrity as a principle of c-structure does not disallow words from making complex contribu- 
tions at functional structure; this means that it is possible for individual, morphologically complex words 
to express the same information as multi-word expressions. For example, the future tense can be expressed 
with verbal morphology as in the French example in (7), or with a future auxiliary as in the English example 
in (8).



(7)	Il



arrivera.


he arrive.FU TU R E
‘He will arrive.’

(8)          He will arrive.

In (7), the future tense is realised directly on the main verb. In contrast, the future is expressed with the 
morphologically independent auxiliary will in (8); see Ackerman and Webelhuth (1998) and Ackerman and 
Stump (2004) for more discussion of examples of this type.
   To take another example, the Swedish singular indefinite marker is a determiner, as in English, realised 
as en or ett depending on the gender. However, the Swedish definite marker is a morphologically bound 
suffix on the noun. Example (9) shows the periphrastic indefinite+noun combination, while (10) shows the 
same noun with a definite suffix:


(9)	En va¨g


kan vara mycket 
la˚ng.


a	road can be


very


long


‘A road can be very long.’



(10)	Va¨gen


hem


var


mycket la˚ng.


road.the home was very


long


‘The road home was very long.’
The periphrastic expressions will arrive, en va¨ g and a/the road are comparable to the synthetic arrivera and
va¨ gen. The periphrastic and synthetic forms alike contain information that is syntactically relevant.
The dual nature of syntactic structure in Lexical Functional Grammar (LFG: Bresnan 2001, Dalrymple
2001, Falk 2001) captures both the commonalities and the differences between words and phrases, as argued 
at length by Simpson (1983), Mohanan (1994, 1995), Bresnan and Mchombo (1995), Matsumoto (1996), 
Bresnan (2001), and many others. Constituent structure represents surface word order and phrasal grouping; 
in accordance with Lexical Integrity, morphologically bound information about tense and definiteness is
‘invisible’ at c-structure, in the sense that the information is not hosted by separate c-structure nodes. At 
functional structure, words and phrases can make similar or identical syntactic contributions, accounting 
for the similarities between words and phrases at this more abstract syntactic level:  as Bresnan (1998) 
puts it, morphology competes with syntax in cases like (7–10), specifying similar grammatical structure 
by different morphological means. LFG’s definition of Lexical Integrity entails that individual morphemes 
may contribute to functional structure, while the smallest unit visible at constituent structure is the word.
   A comparison of English the road and Swedish va¨ gen shows that morphology can contribute infor- 
mation directly to the f-structure without violating Lexical Integrity at c-structure. Lexical entries for the, 
road, and va¨ gen are given in (11–13):
(11)          the    D    (↑ D EFIN ITE ) = +

(12)          road    N    (↑ PR ED ) = ‘road’ 
(↑ N U MB ER) = SG 
(↑ PER SO N ) = 3






(13)          va¨gen    N    (↑ PR ED ) = ‘road’ 
(↑ N U MB ER) = SG 
(↑ PER SO N ) = 3
(↑ D EFIN ITE ) = +
(↑ G EN D ER ) = C O MMO N
C-structures and f-structures for the road and va¨ gen are given in (14):


(14)	NP

N′


P R ED 
	‘ro
ad’	
	


D EFIN ITE 	+	
N	N U MB ER 	S G 	
P ER SO N 	3	


va¨gen



	

G
 
E
N
 
D
 
E
R
 
	
C
 
O
 
M
M
O
 
N





(15)	DP


P R ED 
	‘roa
d’


D′

D	NP

the	N′

N



D
 
E
F
I
N
 
I
T
E
 
	
+
	


	

N
 
U
 
M
B
 
E
R
 
	
S
 
G
 
	


P ER SO N 	3



road

Despite the very different c-structures for the road and va¨ gen, the f-structures are almost identical, the only 
difference being that English nouns do not bear gender.  In LFG, syntactically relevant information can 
be contributed to the f-structure by bound morphology, even though the internal complexity of words is 
invisible at c-structure. Lexical Integrity is therefore maintained at c-structure.
   The key to capturing constructional effects in LFG, without giving up Lexical Integrity, is this obser- 
vation that words and phrases can make identical contributions to f-structure.  Given the Glue Semantics 
approach to compositional semantics (Dalrymple 1999, 2001, Asudeh 2012), which allows terms for se- 
mantic composition to be specified based on f-structures, this equally means that words and phrases can 
make identical semantic contributions.  We provide a means of expressing commonalities in functional 
structure and semantics across linguistic units of various sizes through the means of LFG’s templates (Dal- 
rymple et al. 2004, Asudeh 2012), bundles of grammatical descriptions, which can be associated with parts 
of words, with words, or with phrases. Templates can be defined in terms of other templates, thus allowing 
us to express similarities and differences between constructions, whether they are expressed by a single 
word or a phrase. In this way, we account for the similarities between words and phrases which have been 
a focus of work within Construction Grammar, but within a framework which also incorporates the differ- 
ences between words/phrases and lexicon/grammar as a fundamental architectural principle.  We believe 
that our proposals are valid no matter what theory of morphology is adopted, and no matter whether the 
term “lexicon” refers to a list of words, a list of morphemes, or a list of all unpredictable form-meaning 
pairs whatever their size.
   The paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we present the three similar constructions in English, 
Swedish, and Dutch and show that the constructions are expressed differently in the different languages. In 
section 3, we present templates and show how they can be used to express generalizations. In section 4, we 
present our formal analysis in terms of LFG with Glue Semantics. In section 5, we briefly consider a further 
generalization of the theory in terms of linking theory, which concerns the instantiation of grammatical






functions based on argument structure. Section 6 is the conclusion. The paper ends with a set of formal 
appendices, which includes complete Glue proofs for three examples.


2   Constructions expressed in words and phrases

We now turn to our view of constructions in LFG. As an illustration of our view, we examine variants of the 
traversal construction in English, Swedish, and Dutch, showing that different properties of the construction
– the phrasal configuration, some combination of words in the construction, or both – are responsible for its 
meaning. Section 2.1 discusses the English way-construction, which is signalled by the presence of the word 
way. Section 2.2 discusses the Swedish counterpart of this construction, the Directed Motion Construction, 
which is signalled not by a particular word, but by a special phrasal configuration.  Finally, Section 2.3 
presents two Dutch constructions, the weg-construction and the Transition to Location Construction; the 
weg-construction is similar to its English counterpart, in that the construction is signalled by the presence of 
the word weg. The Dutch Transition to Location Construction is different from both English and Swedish, 
in that there is no special word or phrasal configuration to signal the construction. Each of these patterns 
involves specification of the constraints associated with the construction in a different way: associated with 
a word other than the predicate (English way or Dutch weg); associated with a special phrase structure rule 
(the Swedish Directed Motion Construction); or associated with the main predicate of the construction (the 
Dutch Transition to Location Construction).


2.1   Signalled by a non-head word

It has been argued that the English way-construction in (16) deserves a constructional analysis rather than 
a compositional one, since the construction implies directed motion even though none of the individual 
words in way-examples necessarily denotes motion (Jackendoff 1992, 1990, Goldberg 1995).2 Our analysis 
associates constraints on the form and meaning of the construction with the word way.
   The analysis must capture several generalisations about this construction.  The action denoted by the 
verb elbow does not normally involve traversal, though in example (16) this meaning is present.

(16)        Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd.

   In fact, for most English speakers the English way-construction has two closely related meanings, one 
involving means and one involving manner (Jackendoff 1990:215, Goldberg 1995:202–212), though Gold- 
berg (1995:202–203) points out that the manner interpretation is not available for all speakers. Examples 
(17) and (18) both involve an event denoted by the main verb (whistling or elbowing) and its relation to 
a second event of traversal of a path.  The verb elbowed in example (17) specifies the means by which 
Sarah managed to traverse the crowd: the traversal was made possible by the elbowing action. For those 
who allow the manner interpretation, the verb whistled in example (18) specifies the manner in which the 
traversal of the room took place: Sarah whistled while crossing the room.

(17)	Means: Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd. (traversed the crowd by means of elbowing) 
(18)	Manner: Sarah whistled her way across the room. (traversed the room while whistling)
Our analysis allows us to specify what these meanings have in common and how they differ, as well as
allowing the statement of cross-linguistic similarities and differences in similar constructions in other lan- 
guages.

  2 Marantz (1992) informally sketches an alternative view of the way-construction, which attempts to derive properties of the 
construction from facts about direct complementation and secondary predication.






   Jackendoff (1990:216) and others have claimed that the possessor in the English way-construction must 
be coreferential with the subject, and indeed, in an overwhelming number of cases, this generalisation 
holds. However, we have found examples which counterexemplify this claim:

(19)	He had bought his son’s way into an exclusive military academy normally reserved for the gentry 
and had outfitted him in style.
www.samizdat.com/hero7.html (retrieved April 5, 2010)

(20)	As ambassador, Chesterfield negotiated Britain’s way into the Treaty of Vienna in 1731. 
www.aim25.ac.uk/cgi-bin/frames/fulldesc?coll_id=2117{&}inst_id=86 
(retrieved April 5, 2010)
Furthermore, the noun way in the way-construction can be modified (Jackendoff 1990:217, Goldberg
1995:206):

(21)	In these last twenty years Richard Strauss has flamed his meteoric way into our ken — and out of 
it.	(Buchanan 1918)

An analysis of the construction must be able to derive a meaning for these examples as well; our analysis 
does.


2.2   Signalled by a special phrasal configuration

Toivonen (2002) discusses the Swedish Directed Motion Construction (DMC). The DMC, which is exem- 
plified in (22), consists of a subject, a verb, a weak reflexive (coindexed with the subject), and a directional 
PP.


(22)	Sarah armba˚gade sig


genom


ma¨ngden.


S.	elbowed


SELF through crowd.D EF


∼ ‘Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd.’
The Swedish DMC is very similar in meaning and use to the English way-construction, but the DMC does 
not include any word such as way to flag the construction.  Instead, the construction is distinguished by 
the strict requirement for the presence of certain constituents, restrictions on the individual constituents, 
and perhaps most interestingly, by a word order quirk at odds with the rest of Swedish grammar (Toivonen
2002).  This word order quirk is only seen in DMC expressions that contain a verbal particle.  Consider
(23a–b):



(23)	a.	Jonas knuffade sig



in i



ma¨ngden.


J.	pushed


SELF in inside crowd.D EF


‘Jonas pushed his way into the crowd.’


b.	Jonas knuffade in dig i


ma¨ngden.


J.	pushed


in you inside crowd.D EF


‘Jonas pushed you into the crowd.’

Verbal particles in Swedish (such as in) are normally adjoined to the verb, and must precede the direct 
object, as in (23b) (Toivonen 2003). However, in the DMC, the particle may not adjoin to the verb; instead, 
it is a part of the PP, in i ma¨ ngden, and follows the reflexive, for example sig in (23a).
Toivonen (2002) considers two distinct analyses of the DMC. One proposed analysis is constructional,
in the sense that the DMC meaning is associated directly with a syntactic frame; we adopt an analysis of this 
sort, as we discuss below. The other analysis is purely lexical: the DMC verb is related to another verb via a 
lexical redundancy rule. The DMC verb carries very detailed specifications about what types of arguments 
it must take. Two facts disfavour the second analysis, which ties the DMC to the verb: first, DMC verbs 
cannot participate in any kind of derivational morphology. They cannot be turned into nouns or adjectives,






for example. The DMC verbs can also not be passivised. Second, the most striking distinguishing feature 
of the DMC is the peculiar word order constraint mentioned above. Prepositional particles cannot appear in 
the normal, pre-object particle position in the DMC. This is what distinguishes the DMC from resultatives, 
for example. For these reasons, we prefer an analysis which connects the DMC meaning with a specific 
phrase structural configuration.


2.3   Signalled by the predicate

Van Egmond (2006, 2009) shows that Dutch has two constructions that indicate traversal of a path. One 
construction contains the word weg ‘way’ (24), and the other does not (25).



(24)	Wij worstelen ons



een weg door



de  menigte.


we  wrestle


ourselves a


way through the 
crowd


‘We are wrestling our way through the crowd.’



(25)	Janneke bluft



zich



uit de



benarde



situatie.


J.	bluffs SELF out the awkward situation
∼ ‘Janneke bluffs her way out of the awkward situation.’
The weg-construction exemplified in (24) is also discussed in Verhagen (2003).
   Although the two Dutch constructions are similar in meaning, van Egmond (2006, 2009) shows that 
they nevertheless have distinct interpretations. She calls the type with weg (24) the ‘weg-construction’, and 
the type without weg (25) the ‘Transition to Location Construction’ (TLC). The weg-construction describes 
an incremental traversal of a path by means of (or while) performing the activity denoted by the verb. The 
traversal and the activity denoted by the verb are coidentified: the construction describes a simple event. 
The TLC, on the other hand, describes a transition to a stative location by means of performing the activity 
denoted by the verb, without necessarily traversing a path.  The traversal and the activity denoted by the 
verb are two subevents that are not necessarily coextensive. For example, in (25), the bluffing event can 
take place at a point in time preceding the event in which the subject gets out of the awkward situation.
   We are here interested in the TLC, as it provides an interesting contrast to the English and Swedish 
constructions introduced above. Unlike the English way-construction, the TLC does not contain a specific 
word (such as way) that ‘flags’ the construction, and unlike the Swedish DMC, the Dutch TLC does not 
display special syntax: the word order follows the rules of regular Dutch syntax.3 We propose that the TLC 
information is associated with the verb.  No matter which verb is included in the construction, the TLC 
requires exactly three arguments: a subject, a reflexive direct object and a postpositional oblique. The TLC 
changes the basic argument requirements of the verb, and is in this way comparable to passives, causatives 
and applicatives, all of which also have relation-changing characteristics. Relation-changing processes are 
standardly treated in LFG as alternative ways of mapping thematic roles to syntactic roles.


2.4   Summary

These expressions from Swedish, English and Dutch have in common a core part of their meanings and 
also the fact that their meanings are not straightforwardly predictable from the meanings that their parts 
have in other contexts.  Each of them has been noted to be problematic for Lexical Integrity.  Below, we 
present analyses of these constructions that capture the relevant data while preserving Lexical Integrity. 
The Swedish DMC, the English way-construction, and the Dutch weg-construction and TLC have distinct 
syntactic realizations.  However, as has been argued in detail by van Egmond (2006, 2009), Toivonen

  3 The PP in the Dutch examples is a prepositional phrase, not a postpositional phrase. Directional PPs normally contain post- 
positions in Dutch, while stative locations are prepositional PPs. The fact that the TLC contains postpositions and not prepositions 
follows from van Egmond’s (2006, 2009:99–101) analysis of the TLC as an expression of transition to a stative location.






(2002) and Verhagen (2003), there are nevertheless strong reasons for treating them as distinct realizations 
of the same ‘construction’. The basic similarity lies in their meaning, as is evident from the fact that the 
expressions translate into each other across the languages. The expressions entail traversal, even though 
this sense is not necessarily contributed by the verb. The verb does not need to be a motion verb. Our task 
is to capture the similarities between the constructions, while at the same time modelling their differences. 
The constructions crucially differ in which formal element carries the traversal meaning. We assume that 
the traversal meaning is signalled by the word way in English, as this word is necessarily present.  The 
Swedish DMC does not contain a specific word signalling the construction; all words in the Swedish DMC 
are exchangeable, since even the reflexive changes to agree with its antecedent. Instead, the construction is 
flagged by its word order. We therefore assume that the information that is specific for the traversal reading 
is tied to a phrase structure rule. Finally, the Dutch TLC is not associated with a specific word or peculiar 
word order. We therefore make the assumption that the clausal head, the verb, is the locus of the relevant 
information.


3   Encapsulating generalisations through templates

Our proposal allows for cross-linguistic generalisations to be captured by the use of templates to encode 
complex syntactic descriptions and the relations among them. Templates can be associated with objects of 
various sizes, from parts of words to phrases. This does not violate LFG’s Lexical Integrity Principle, as 
words are still intact and independent at c-structure.


3.1   Background

An LFG template is nothing more than a named functional description, where the latter is a set of equations 
that describe linguistic structures. For any LFG grammar defined in terms of templates, we could construct 
a completely equivalent grammar which does not use templates, simply by replacing each template with the 
description that it abbreviates: by doing this, the same grammatical descriptions would be associated with 
words and phrases in each of the two grammars, and the grammars would produce the same c-structures 
and f-structures for the words and phrases of the language.  Importantly, however, the grammar without 
templates would lack the means of expressing generalisations across lexical entries and grammar rules 
which templates make available.
   Functional descriptions most notably describe f-structures, but can in principle contain descriptions of 
any linguistic structure in LFG’s Correspondence Architecture (Kaplan 1987, Asudeh 2006). A template 
associates a name with a given functional description, such that the description can be invoked throughout 
the lexicon, as originally envisioned (Dalrymple et al. 2004), or, more generally, anywhere in the grammar, 
as we propose. Templates thus not only allow generalisations to be captured within the lexicon, but also 
across the lexicon and the rest of the grammar.  It is in this sense that templates can be construed as an 
important component of the lexicon–grammar interface.
   Template definitions may contain reference to other templates. This effectively creates a hierarchy of 
templates, similar to the perhaps more familiar type hierarchies of Head-Driven Phrase Structure Gram- 
mar (HPSG; Pollard and Sag 1987, 1994, Ginzburg and Sag 2000) and Sign-Based Construction Grammar 
(SBCG; Michaelis 2010, Sag 2010, Boas and Sag 2012). However, there are some noteworthy differences 
between templates and types. First, type hierarchies represent relations between structures, whereas tem- 
plate hierarchies represent relations between descriptions of structures. This means that templates do not 
appear in the actual structures of the theory, but only in descriptions that the structures must satisfy. This 
contrasts with types in HPSG, where each feature value in a structure (a directed acyclic graph) is associated 
with a type.






   Second, type hierarchies in HPSG and SBCG represent inheritance in an and/or semilattice. The daugh- 
ters of a type represent disjoint sub-types (or). Multiple mothers for a type represent conjoined super-types 
(and). For example, consider the following type hierarchy from Malouf (1998):
(26)                                        substantive

noun	relational

c-noun	gerund	verb
The type substantive is a sub-type of the root type head (not shown here). Its two daughters, noun and 
relational , disjointly partition the super-type.  Each of the types noun and relational  in turn has two 
daughters that disjointly partition the type. However, the type gerund is common to both and constitutes a 
conjunction of the super-types: a gerund object is both a noun object and a relational object.
   Template hierarchies do not represent inheritance, but rather inclusion.  If a template A dominates a 
template B, then the description that A labels appears in the description that B labels.  The semantics of 
template invocation, denoted by the prefix @ in a description, is just substitution. For example, given the 
template in (27) below, the lexical entries in (28a) and (28b) are strictly equivalent.
(27)	3SG :=   (↑ SU B J PER S ) = 3 
(↑ SU B J N U M) = SG

(28)	a.	laughs   (↑ PR ED ) = ‘laugh(SU B J)’ 
(↑ SU B J PER S) = 3
(↑ SU B J N U M) = SG
b.	laughs   (↑ PR ED ) = ‘laugh(SU B J)’
@3SG
It is clear from this example that a template is nothing more than an abbreviation for an LFG description.
   Descriptions in LFG support the boolean operations of conjunction, disjunction and negation.  Tem- 
plates therefore also support these operations. For example, the 3SG template can be negated in a lexical 
entry:
(29)        laugh   (↑ PR ED ) = ‘laugh(SU B J)’
@3SG
The lexical entries for laughs and laugh would thus both be “daughters” of the template 3SG in a template
hierarchy, because both entries include the template, even if one negates it and the other does not: 
(30)	3SG
laugh	laughs
This emphasises the difference between a hierarchy that represents inheritance, as in HPSG or SBCG type 
hierarchies, versus a network that represents inclusion, as in LFG template hierarchies. It would not make 
sense for both laugh and laughs to inherit from a 3SG type object, but both words can nevertheless include 
the description (with or without negation) that is labelled by the 3SG template.
   Templates can also be parametrised, where the parameters are stated as arguments to the template. For 
example, the template in (31) could be used in the lexical entry for any intransitive verb, such that the entry 
for laughs could be rewritten as in (32).
(31)        INTRANS(p) :=   (↑ PR ED ) = ‘P(SU B J)’

(32)        laughs   @INTRANS(laugh)
@3SG
The lexical entry for laughs in (32) is still strictly equivalent to the one in (28b), but the templates bring to 
the fore the generalisation that the only idiosyncratic information is what is contributed by the verb root.






For example, the entry for yawns would differ only in the argument to the parametrised INTRANS template
(‘yawn’ instead of ‘laugh’).
   Finally, as we will see presently, template hierarchies need not have a single root: there is no need for a 
most general template whose description is included in all of the other templates in the network. Templates 
can include references to other templates, or they can stand alone, as we will see in our definition of the 
Transition Template Hierarchy.


3.2   The Transition Template Hierarchy

We propose a single theory of constructions that uses existing LFG mechanisms to capture commonali- 
ties involving the traversal/result construction in English, Swedish, and Dutch.  Our theory preserves the 
intuition that similar constructional specifications can be associated with different components of the con- 
struction. The English way-construction is driven by lexical specifications for way, together with general 
phrase structural facts about English. Similarly, the Dutch weg-construction is driven by lexical specifica- 
tions for weg. The Swedish DMC is driven by a specific phrase-structural configuration. The Dutch TLC 
is associated with specifications on the verbal predicate.
The template hierarchy we assume is represented in (33):




(33)	MEANS


DUTCH-TLC



TRANSITION

TRAVERSAL



MANNER





TRAVERSAL-MEANS


TRAVERSAL-MANNER




SWEDISH-DMC	DUTCH-WEG	ENGLISH-WAY

The template TRANSITION contains material that is common to the Swedish, Dutch, and English construc- 
tions; it encodes information about agency and causation.  MEANS and MANNER are two other general 
templates that specify information about the means or manner of the event. The TRAVERSAL template is 
defined in terms of the more general TRANSITION template, as represented by the line connecting them, 
which means that TRAVERSAL incorporates all of the information associated with the TRANSITION tem- 
plate while also contributing some information specific to TRAVERSAL. TRAVERSAL in turn appears as a 
part of the definition of both the TRAVERSAL-MEANS template and the TRAVERSAL-MANNER template.
   The templates TRAVERSAL-MEANS and TRAVERSAL-MANNER provide different ways of adding in- 
formation to the TRAVERSAL template, supplying the information that the main verb denotes either the 
means or the manner in which the path traversal is achieved. The Swedish DMC has the means interpre- 
tation (Toivonen 2002:318), and so we treat it as associated with the TRAVERSAL-MEANS template; the 
manner interpretation may be available dialectally, but we do not treat this variation here. The templates 
SWEDISH-DMC, DUTCH-WEG, and ENGLISH-WAY contribute additional language-specific information to 
these templates, as we will see. Finally, the DUTCH-TLC is another language-specific template which draws 
together information from MEANS and TRANSITION.
   In keeping with LFG’s focus on typological generalizations,  this templatic approach sheds light 
on differences and similarities in constructional effects across languages.   Information that is shared 
across constructions in a language can be stated in non-terminal nodes of the template hierarchy and 
is inherited by specific constructional templates.  Similarly, the fact that grammatical information may 
be shared by constructions in different languages is captured by calls in language-specific construc-






tional templates to the same templates in the hierarchy.4    For example, the English way-construction 
(on one interpretation),  the Swedish Directed Motion Construction,  and the Dutch weg-construction 
all share a meaning component that concerns means of traversal of a path and therefore all call the 
TRAVERSAL-MEANS template in our hierarchy. The template hierarchy thus defines a typological space 
of possibilities.  For clarity of exposition, we have chosen to label the terminal templates in the hierar- 
chy with language-specific names, such as ‘SWEDISH-DMC’, but the constellation of template calls and 
additional information that is realized in this template may of course also be instantiated in this exact 
form in other languages. Therefore, more accurate but less user-friendly names for the terminal templates 
would be names like ‘TRAVERSAL-MEANS-PHRASAL’, ‘TRAVERSAL-MEANS-NON-HEAD-MARKED’,
‘TRAVERSAL-MEANS-HEAD-MARKED’, and so forth.


4   Formal Analysis

4.1   Phrase structurally flagged constructions

4.1.1   The phrase structure rule

Turning first to the Swedish DMC, we propose that this construction is most elegantly analysed with the 
following construction-specific phrase structure rule, which makes crucial use of a call to the template 
SWEDISH-DMC:


(34)	V′	→	(V0)
↑ = ↓



N
P
(
↑
 
O
 
B
 
J
)
 
=
 
↓
(↓ PRO N TY PE ) = SIMPLEX -
R E FL E X I V E
@SWEDISH-DMC((↑ 
PR ED FN))



P
P
(↑ O B L) 
= ↓


The template call appears on the NP node.  This is a partially arbitrary decision; the call could instead 
appear on another node.  We chose the NP, as we see the reflexive as a signal of the construction.  Note, 
however, that the reflexive changes according to the person and number of the subject:  it is not a fixed 
lexical marker of the construction, which makes it different from way/weg. By convention, template calls 
are marked by the at sign ‘@’. The SWEDISH-DMC template takes a single argument, the value of the 
PR ED FN of the V′; we provide more information about this template in 4.1.2.
   Notice that FN is not itself a semantic form, but rather part of a semantic form; the attribute FN and 
argument designators such as A R G 1 allow reference to the components of a semantic form (Crouch et al.
2012) according to the following pattern: 
(35)        [PR ED     ‘FN(A R G 1,A R G 2,. . . )’] 
The specifications in (36) are equivalent:






Use of the attribute FN thus allows reference to the predicate name in PR ED features, setting subcategoriza- 
tion aside. The implications of this are further discussed in section 4.2 below.
   We observe four important properties of our treatment of the SWEDISH-DMC. First, associating the 
template for this construction with a special phrase structure rule reflects the fact that only this particular 
configuration has the special meaning associated with the DMC.

  4 This approach to grammatical variation is of long standing in the HPSG and now Sign-Based Construction Grammar traditions. 
For example, see (Pollard and Sag 1994:57–59) and discussion in (Sag et al. 2012).






   Second, the NP and PP daughters of V′ in (34) are obligatory. Our theory assumes that optionality must 
be explicitly marked in phrase structure rules, as in computational LFG treatments (e.g. Crouch et al. 2012) 
and in contrast to theoretical positions that allow generalised optionality (e.g. Bresnan 2001). The V0 node 
is optional, since the verb need not appear there: the Swedish finite verb appears in I rather than V.
   Third, we must explicitly state the fact that the NP is a simplex reflexive, such as sig, and not just any 
kind of NP or even a complex reflexive (e.g. sig sja¨ lv).
Fourth, the construction requires an O B L(IQU E) phrase. Since the O B L must be realized as a post-object
PP, it cannot also be realized as a pre-object particle. Post-object particles are projecting, intransitive prepo- 
sitions (Jackendoff 1973, Toivonen 2003). The O B L must be directional, which we capture by referring to 
a PATH feature, as in (42).


4.1.2   The SWEDISH-DMC template

Semantically, the Swedish DMC and the English way-construction involve an event characterised by the 
main verb in the construction and a second event involving traversal of a path. The basic template TRANSITION 
is defined as follows:
(37)          TRANSITION    :=      λRλxλeλe′.R(e)  ∧ agent(e) = x ∧ cause(e′ ) = x :
(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑ SU B J)σ  ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ
Templates encoding syntactic information and expressing syntactic generalisations are defined as sets of 
functional equations, as described by Dalrymple et al. (2004). However, since our concern is the syntax- 
semantics interface and meaning differences among constructions, we define this template with a meaning 
constructor (Dalrymple 1999, 2001, Asudeh 2004), which provides part of the common meaning for the 
traversal/result construction in English, Swedish, and Dutch. This meaning constructor requires:
• a R EL meaning R specifying the nature of the event e, which is provided by the verb in the construc- 
tion; for Bill elbowed his way through the crowd, e is required to be an event of elbowing, and so R 
is the predicate elbow
• a meaning x for the subject of the main verb, which is interpreted as the agent of e and the causer of 
the transition event e′
• two event variables e and e′ , associated with the semantic attributes, EV EN T1 and EV EN T2, repre- 
senting the event denoted by the verb and the transition event.

This basic meaning is augmented by other meaning constructors in the template hierarchy.  Our charac- 
terisation of the subject of the main event as an agent of the event e and a causer of the transition event 
e′  follows Goldberg (1995:212–213), who claims that the motion in the way-construction must be self- 
propelled. However, Jackendoff (1990:216) suggests that although the means interpretation is necessarily 
tied to deliberate action, the manner interpretation is also compatible with action that is not deliberately per- 
formed. Examples such as (38), which has a manner and not a means interpretation, are better characterised 
by Jackendoff; in this example, e is an event of bleeding, which is not associated with an agent:

(38)        Baxter’s wife said her son bled his way into the ambulance painlessly.
http://newvoices.org/humor/the-slice-man-cometh.html
To account for these examples, it may be better to refer to the highest thematic argument of the main event 
e rather than explicitly referring to the agent. We leave further exploration of this issue for future research, 
and provisionally encode the relevant argument of the main event as an agent.
   The template hierarchy in (33) encodes the fact that the template TRAVERSAL calls the template 
TRANSITION, with the effect that TRAVERSAL incorporates all of the information in TRANSITION as 
well as specifying some additional information. The TRAVERSAL template is defined in (39):






(39)        TRAVERSAL    :=    @TRANSITION
λP λe′.P (e′ ) ∧ traversal(e′) :
[(↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸ [(↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ]
The first line in the definition of TRAVERSAL contains the call to the template TRANSITION, marked as 
in (34) with the at sign ‘@’. The second line adds the information that e′  is a traversal event. In technical 
terms, this meaning constructor behaves as a modifier on the predication associated with the transition 
event.
   In turn, the TRAVERSAL-MEANS template is defined simply by calls to the TRAVERSAL template and 
the MEANS template:

(40)        TRAVERSAL-MEANS    :=    @TRAVERSAL
@MEANS

The MEANS template is given in (41):
(41)        MEANS   :=   λP λeλe′ .P (e)(e′ ) ∧ means(e′) = e :
[(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸ [(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ]
The MEANS meaning constructor specifies that the event e represents the means of achieving the event e′ . 
With respect to TRAVERSAL-MEANS, this means that the main verb’s event e is the means of achieving the 
event e′  of traversing the path, as in an English example like Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd or 
the Swedish equivalent, where the traversal through the crowd is achieved by elbowing.
   The SWEDISH-DMC template, specific to the Swedish Directed Motion Construction, is defined by 
reference to the template TRAVERSAL-MEANS.  It also calls the syntactic subcategorization template 
TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE, to be described in Section 4.2, and provides some additional material specific 
to the Swedish construction:
(42)        SWEDISH-DMC(PFN)   :=    @TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)
@TRAVERSAL-MEANS
λQλP λy.∃e.∃e′ .∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧
theme(e′ ) = y ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧ Q(z) :
[((↑ O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ (↑ O B L)σ ] ⊸
[(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
(↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ ↑σ
The argument of the SWEDISH-DMC template is called “PFN” in this definition;5 it is passed as an argu- 
ment to the TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE template, which is defined in (45).  Besides the two template calls, 
SWEDISH-DMC also contributes a meaning constructor to complete the meaning of the Swedish construc- 
tion, which requires the following:

• a meaning Q depending on the O B L  phrase, specifying the nature of the path traversed; for (22) 
(∼‘Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd’), the path is required to go through the crowd.

• a meaning P , contributed by the main verb, specifying the nature of the event e denoted by the main 
verb and its relation to the transition event e′ ; for (22) (∼‘Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd’),
e is an elbowing event and is the means enabling the traversal event e′.

• a meaning y for the object of the main verb, which is (syntactically) required to be a reflexive and 
hence to corefer with the subject of the main verb; y is the theme of e′ , the traversal event.

  5 The template argument PFN is meant to be mnemonic for P R E D F N, since this will ultimately play the role of F N in the value 
of a P R E D feature.






Our analysis produces the meaning in (43) for Sarah armba˚ gade sig genom ma¨ ngden ‘Sarah elbowed SELF
through the crowd’.
(43)        ∃e.∃e′.∃z.elbow(e)  ∧ agent(e) = sarah ∧ cause(e′ ) = sarah ∧ means(e′) = e  ∧
traversal(e′)  ∧ theme(e′ ) = sarah ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧ through(z, ιx.[crowd(x)])
A full proof of the derivation of this meaning is given in the Appendix.


4.2   Verb lexicon and basic subcategorization templates

Our approach entails a potentially deep consequence for the theory of argument linking and subcatego- 
rization, because verbs in our approach specify default subcategorization through template calls in such a 
way that the subcategorization can be constructionally overridden. Thus, subcategorization is moved to the 
template component.
   We have seen that the SWEDISH-DMC template provides a PR ED specification with subcategorization 
frame and semantic specifications for the construction. This in turn means that the lexical entry for a verb 
must supply a default PR ED and semantics which can be overridden when the verb is used in a construction 
like the way-construction.6  We assume that the verb elbowed/armba˚ gade, which appears in (16) and (22), 
is specified as follows:
(44)          elbowed/armba˚gade    V    λe.elbow(e) : (↑σ R EL)
  @TRANSITIVE(elbow)	
  λRλxλy∃e.R(e)  ∧ agent(e) = x ∧ theme(e) = y:  
(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑ SU B J)σ  ⊸ (↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ ↑σ
The first line of the entry specifies the verb’s s-structure semantic R EL(ATIO N ) , which it contributes on 
each occasion of its use. The second part of the entry specifies a default semantic contribution and subcat- 
egorization information, encoded by the template TRANSITIVE and the meaning constructor in the third 
line. This material effectively serves as a default, because unless some other part of the system specifies 
an alternative, constructional G F template, there is no way to check Completeness and Coherence and the 
structure fails.
   The TRANSITIVE template takes a single argument, here ‘elbow’.  The definition of TRANSITIVE is 
stated with respect to an arbitrary argument PFN:7
(45)          TRANSITIVE(PFN)    =  (↑ PR ED ) = ‘PFN((↑ SU B J),(↑ O B J))’
The argument PFN of the TRANSITIVE template appears in parentheses after the template name, and also 
appears in the definition of the template as the FN of the semantic form that is the value of the PR ED feature. 
For the verb elbow, the call to the TRANSITIVE template passes in the argument ‘elbow’. The template call
@TRANSITIVE(elbow) is exactly equivalent to the following equation: 
(46)	(↑ PR ED ) = ‘elbow((↑ SU B J),(↑ O B J))’
   We now turn to the default meaning constructor for elbow given in (44), repeated here: 
(47)	λRλxλy∃e.R(e)  ∧ agent(e) = x ∧ theme(e) = y:
(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑ SU B J)σ  ⊸ (↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ ↑σ
  6 Our analysis of the Swedish DMC and the English way-construction involves replacing rather than modifying the default 
semantic form of the main verb with the specifications provided by the construction. In the analysis of other constructions, it may 
be preferable to modify the semantic form via restriction or other operators, as proposed for the analysis of complex predicates by 
Butt et al. (2003) (see also Butt and King 2005 on causatives).
7 For ease of explication, (45) specifies an active subcategorization frame for the verb, simplifying away from mapping theory
issues and the possibility for passivisation of this verb.  We return to a discussion of the interaction of mapping theory and our 
theory of constructions in Section 5 below, where we propose a revised TRANSITIVE template which refers to argument structure 
roles rather than grammatical functions and which interacts appropriately with mapping theory.






This meaning constructor requires a R EL R which is supplied by the verb (the R EL for the verb elbow is 
specified above as λe.elbow(e)), a meaning x for the SU B J, and a meaning y for the O B J. For a sentence 
like Bill elbowed Fred, the meaning that is produced is, as desired:
(48)        ∃e.elbow(e)  ∧ agent(e) = Bill ∧ theme(e) = F red
When the verb elbowed is used in the traversal construction, these default specifications are overridden 
by the specifications imposed by the construction, and the special constructional specifications are used 
instead.
   Three further subcategorization templates and one control template are used in the analysis below: 
(49)	TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)	:=	(↑ PR ED ) = ‘PFN((↑ SU B J),(↑ O B J),(↑ O B L))’
(50)          TRANSITIVE-PREDICATIVE(PFN)   :=    (↑ PR ED ) = ‘PFN((↑ SU B J),(↑ O B J),(↑ X C O MP))’
(51)          DITRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)   :=    (↑ PR ED ) = ‘PFN((↑ SU B J),(↑ O B J),(↑ O B Jθ ),(↑ O B L))’ 
(52)          OBJ-CONTROL    :=    (↑ O B J) = (↑ X C O MP SU B J)
The TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE template is called by the SWEDISH-DMC and ENGLISH-WAY templates, the 
TRANSITIVE-PREDICATIVE and OBJ-CONTROL templates are called by the DUTCH-TLC template, and 
the DITRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE template is called by the DUTCH-WEG template.


4.3   Lexically flagged constructions

The English way-construction relies on many of the same templates as the Swedish DMC. It is different 
in that it is completely regular in terms of phrasal structure, so no exceptional phrase structure rule is 
required. Rather, we assume the standard V′  rule for English, which already permits an NP O B JEC T and 
a PP O B LIQU E .  Evidence that the PP is an argument of the main verb and not a modifier of way comes 
from adverb placement: it is possible for an adverb to intervene between way and the PP, while this is not 
possible if the PP is associated with the object:

(53)        Sarah elbowed her way quickly through the crowd.

(54)	a.	Sarah elbowed a friend from London quickly. 
b.   * Sarah elbowed a friend quickly from London.
   The locus of the English way-construction is the word way, which receives the following specification: 
(55)	way	N	(↑ PR ED ) = ‘way’
λx.way(x) : (↑σ VA R) ⊸ (↑σ R ESTR )
(   @ENGLISH-WAY((O B J ↑) PR ED FN)   )
According to this lexical entry, way contributes a semantic form ‘way’ and a standard noun meaning 
λx.way(x) on every occasion of its use, even in the way-construction. As we will see, our analysis equates 
the path specified in the ENGLISH-WAY template with the path denoted by way. Retaining the standard 
semantics for way allows us to provide a satisfactory analysis of modification of way and specification of 
possessors of way other than the subject, as discussed in Section 2.1. The relevant examples are:
(56)        a.     As ambassador, Chesterfield negotiated Britain’s way into the Treaty of Vienna in 1731.
b.	In these last twenty years Richard Strauss has flamed his meteoric way into our ken — and 
out of it.

The ENGLISH-WAY constructional template appears in parentheses, since it is an optional contribution of 
the word way. Its argument is ((O B J ↑) PR ED FN): this expression uses inside-out functional uncertainty to






refer to the f-structure in which way is an O B J, (O B J ↑), and passes the PR ED FN of that f-structure as an
argument to the template.
The definition of the ENGLISH-WAY template is:

(57)        ENGLISH-WAY(PFN)   :=    @TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)
{@TRAVERSAL-MEANS | @TRAVERSAL-MANNER}
λY λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧
theme(e′ ) = x ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧
Q(z) ∧ z = Y (x) :
[(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
[(((O B J  ↑) O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ ((O B J  ↑) O B L)σ ] ⊸
[((O B J  ↑)σ EV EN T1) ⊸ ((O B J  ↑)σ EV EN T2) ⊸ (O B J  ↑)σ ] ⊸
(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ (O B J  ↑)σ
As shown in (33), this definition calls the TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE template and passes in the FN  of the 
main verb, providing the semantic form and syntactic subcategorization specification for the construction. 
The second line contains a disjunction:  either the TRAVERSAL-MEANS or the TRAVERSAL-MANNER 
template is called.8  This is because the English way-construction allows either a means interpretation for 
the construction or a manner interpretation. The TRAVERSAL-MANNER template is defined in (58) in terms 
of template calls to the TRAVERSAL and MANNER templates:

(58)        TRAVERSAL-MANNER    :=    @TRAVERSAL
@MANNER
The MANNER template is similar to the MEANS template defined in (41), except that it specifies that a 
relation R is the manner by which the event e′ is achieved, rather than the means:
(59)        MANNER :=  λP λRλe′.P (R)(e′ ) ∧ manner(e′) = R :
[(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸ [(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ]
   Besides the template calls in the first two lines, the ENGLISH-WAY template contributes the following 
meaning constructor:

(60)          λY λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ 
theme(e′ ) = x ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧ 
Q(z) ∧ z = Y (x) :
[(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
[(((O B J  ↑) O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ ((O B J  ↑) O B L)σ ] ⊸
[((O B J  ↑)σ EV EN T1) ⊸ ((O B J  ↑)σ EV EN T2) ⊸ (O B J  ↑)σ ] ⊸
(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ (O B J  ↑)σ
This meaning constructor requires:
• a meaning Y for the way NP, which provides additional information about the path z that is traversed
• a meaning Q for the oblique phrase; for the example Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd, this 
is the meaning of through the crowd, which characterises the path z
• a meaning P , contributed by the main verb, specifying the nature of the event e and its relation to the 
traversal event; for (22) (Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd), e is required to be an elbowing 
event and is the means enabling the traversal event

  8 Some speakers do not find the manner interpretation well-formed. Our analysis accounts for their grammars through lexical 
variation: the ENGLISH-WAY template in the grammars of these speakers calls only the TRAVERSAL-MEANS template.






• a meaning x for the possessor of way, which plays the role of the theme of the traversal event e′.

This analysis produces the meaning in (61) for the means interpretation of Sarah elbowed her way through 
the crowd:
(61)	∃e.∃e′.∃z.elbow(e)  ∧ agent(e) = sarah ∧
cause(e′ ) = sarah ∧ means(e′) = e  ∧ traversal(e′)  ∧ theme(e′ ) = sarah ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ through(z, ιx.[crowd(x)])  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(sarah, y)]
The main difference between this meaning and the meaning of its Swedish counterpart Sarah armba˚ gade 
sig genom ma¨ ngden is that the English way-construction provides a more detailed specification of the path 
z. We follow Partee (1983/1997) and Partee and Borschev (1998) in treating the genitive construction as 
involving reference to a unique individual who bears some contextually specified relation Rc to a possessor. 
The possessive pronoun in the phrase her way is resolved to the subject Sarah, and the meaning of her way
is analysed as ιy.[way(y)  ∧  Rc(sarah, y)], the unique y that is a way and that bears the relation Rc to
Sarah. This analysis enables us to treat cases in which way is modified or possessed by an individual other
than the subject of the construction.  A full proof of the meaning of Sarah elbowed her way through the 
crowd is given in the Appendix.


4.4	Traversal constructions in Dutch

The templates for the Dutch weg-construction and the Transition to Location Construction are as follows: 
(62)	DUTCH-WEG(PFN)	:=	@DITRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)
{@TRAVERSAL-MEANS | @TRAVERSAL-MANNER}
λY λQλP λyλx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧
theme(e′ ) = y ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧
Q(z) ∧ z = Y (x)  ∧ coextensive(e, e′ ) :
[(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
[(((O B Jθ  ↑) O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ ((O B Jθ  ↑) O B L)σ ] ⊸
[((O B Jθ  ↑)σ EV EN T1) ⊸ ((O B Jθ  ↑)σ EV EN T2) ⊸ (O B Jθ  ↑)σ ] ⊸
(↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ (↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ (O B Jθ  ↑)σ
DUTCH-WEG, like the English way-construction, allows either a means or manner interpretation and further
specifies that the event denoted by the main verb and the traversal event are coextensive.

(63)	DUTCH-TLC(PFN)	:=	@TRANSITIVE-PREDICATIVE(PFN)
@OBJ-CONTROL
@TRANSITION
@MEANS
λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ theme(e′ ) = x ∧ Q(x) : 
[(↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ (↑ X C O MP)σ ] ⊸
[(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
(↑ O B J)σ   ⊸ ↑σ
DUTCH-TLC involves a transition but not necessarily a traversal, and so is defined in terms of the TRANSITION 
template. It specifies a means interpretation (and disallows a manner interpretation), and so incorporates 
the MEANS template in its definition. We assume that the prepositional phrase serves as a secondary predi- 
cation on the object, since van Egmond (2006, 2009) argues that there is no path traversal in this case and 
also notes that the TLC bears some similarities to the resultative. In LFG-theoretic terms, this indicates that 
the PP is an X C O MP.






5   Linking

We now return to the definition of syntactic subcategorization requirements in the templates that appear 
as defaults in verbal lexical entries and as specifications of subcategorisation requirements in the way- and 
DMC constructions.  Recall that for simplicity, we assumed that the relation between semantic roles and 
grammatical functions is fixed by the construction or by information in the lexical entry of a predicate. For 
example, the default subcategorization for a verb like elbowed/armba˚ gade was given by the TRANSITIVE 
template, defined in (45) as:
(64)          TRANSITIVE(PFN)    :=    (↑ PR ED ) = ‘PFN((↑ SU B J),(↑ O B J))’
This is overly inflexible; the correct analysis would specify argument structure information for the predicate 
or construction rather than a specific set of grammatical functions, and would appeal to some version of 
Mapping Theory (Bresnan and Zaenen 1990, Alsina 1993, Butt 1995, Butt et al. 1997) to derive the syntactic 
subcategorization frame for the predicate from argument structure. We sketch here how this would work 
for the lexical specifications for the verb elbow, following the approach of Butt et al. (1997).
Butt et al. (1997) assume the following projection architecture:



(65)	V
elbow


 R EL 	ELB OW  
λ
 AG EN T 	[ ]	
TH EME 	[ ]



f 1 :[ ]

f 2 :[ ]



σ
 
s
1
 
:
[
 
]

2
 
:
[
 
]


   Argument structure is represented as an attribute-value matrix reachable from the c-structure via the α 
projection. The familiar φ projection is defined as the composition of the α projection to argument structure 
and the λ projection from argument structure to f-structure.
The lexical entry for elbowed/armba˚ gade can now be stated as:9
(66)	elbowed/armba˚gade	V	λe.elbow(e) : (↑σ R EL)
  (↑ PR ED FN) = elbow	
  λRλxλyλe.R(e)  ∧ agent(e) = x ∧ theme(e) = y:	
(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (∗α  AG EN T)λσ ⊸ (∗α  TH EME )λσ ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T ) ⊸ ↑σ
Instead of specifying the default grammatical functions SU B J and O B J, this lexical entry specifies a default 
argument structure containing an AG EN T and a TH EME . These will be linked to the appropriate grammatical 
functions according to mapping theory.
   The English way-construction and the Swedish DMC construction could be treated similarly, with ar- 
gument structure roles specified in the templates for the construction, and the mapping from argument 
structure roles to grammatical functions provided by mapping theory. However, these constructions do in 
fact seem to be syntactically inflexible, and cannot undergo passivisation or other argument alternations:10
(67)     * Bill’s way through the park was elbowed (by him).



(68)	* Bill armba˚gades genom


parken


(av sig/sig


sja¨lv).


Bill elbow.PA SS  through park.D EF by


self/himself


Given this, we propose to leave the templates appearing in those constructions in their current form, since 
we believe that specifying particular grammatical functions and disallowing argument alternations such as 
passive is the right treatment for these.
  9 The variable �∗ refers to the mother of the c-structure node that bears the annotation.  Thus, �∗α  in the lexical refers to the 
argument structure of the mother of the terminal node elbowed/armba˚ gade, i.e. the argument structure of V.
10 The judgement for the Swedish example is for the DMC interpretation; see Toivonen (2002) for further discussion.






6   Conclusion

We have shown that it is not necessary to eliminate the word/phrase or lexicon/grammar distinctions in or- 
der to capture constructional effects in a principled manner. We did so by showing how this could be done 
in the context of Lexical-Functional Grammar, which upholds the Strong Lexicalist Hypothesis through the 
Lexical Integrity Principle. Like other LFG work, our approach retains Lexical Integrity as a foundational 
principle, due to the multifaceted nature of grammatical representation in LFG: the same functional struc- 
ture and semantics can be associated with a part of a word, a word, or a phrase, but this does not imply 
that words and phrases are indistinguishable at other levels. We can capture the fundamental differences 
between words and phrases that motivate Lexical Integrity at the level of constituent structure, while also 
capturing commonalities in the abstract syntactic and semantic contributions of words and phrases.
   Our approach captures the intuitions of Construction Grammar in an LFG setting by the use of tem- 
plates, which allow for generalisations to be expressed by naming and reusing grammatical descriptions. 
We accomplish this without in any sense admitting constructions as first-class entities in the theory: the abil- 
ity to name and reuse descriptions adds no new formal power or new formal objects to the theory. Though 
templates were independently motivated in much previous work for reasons of expediency in grammar 
writing, they now play a crucial theoretical role: templates serve as the locus of grammatical information 
that can be either lexically or structurally invoked, and they thus formalise one aspect of the lexicon–syntax 
interface. The templates are nevertheless just abbreviations for grammatical descriptions: a grammar with 
templates is extensionally equivalent to the same grammar with all template calls replaced by the corre- 
sponding template content. In an important sense, then, constructions are epiphenomenal, according to this 
view.






References

Ackerman, Farrell, and Gregory Stump. 2004.	Paradigms and Periphrastic Expression:  A Study in
Realization-Based Lexicalism.  In Louisa Sadler and Andrew Spencer, eds., Projecting Morphology,
111–157. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Ackerman, Farrell, and Gert Webelhuth. 1998. A Theory of Predicates. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. 
Alsina, Alex. 1993.  Predicate Composition: A Theory of Syntactic Function Alternations.  Ph.D. thesis,
Stanford University.
Anderson, Stephen R. 1992. A-Morphous Morphology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Aronoff, Mark. 1993.  Morphology by itself: Stems and inflectional classes.  Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.

Asudeh, Ash. 2004. Resumption as Resource Management. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

—. 2006.  Direct Compositionality and the Architecture of LFG.  In Miriam Butt, Mary Dalrymple, and 
Tracy Holloway King, eds., Intelligent Linguistic Architectures:  Variations on themes by Ronald M. 
Kaplan. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

—. 2012. The Logic of Pronominal Resumption. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Beesley, Kenneth R., and Lauri Karttunen. 2000.   Finite-State Non-Concatenative Morphotactics.   In 
Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Phonology 
(SIGPHON-2000), 1–12.

—. 2003. Finite-State Morphology. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Blevins, James P. 2006. Word-based morphology. Journal of Linguistics 42: 531–573.

Boas, Hans C., and Ivan A. Sag, eds. 2012.  Sign-Based Construction Grammar.  Stanford, CA: CSLI 
Publications.

Booij, Geert. 2005a.  Compounding and Derivation:  Evidence for Construction Morphology.  In Wolf- 
gang U. Dressler, Dieter Kastovsky, Oskar Pfeiffer, and Franz Rainer, eds., Morphology and its Demar- 
cation, 109–132. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

—. 2005b. Construction-Dependent Morphology. Lingue e Linguaggio 12.

—. 2009.   Lexical Integrity as a Formal Universal:  A Constructionist View.  In S. Scalise et al., eds.,
Universals of Language Today, Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 83–100. Springer.

Bresnan, Joan. 1998.   Morphology competes with syntax:  Explaining typological variation in weak 
crossover effects.  In Pilar Barbosa, Danny Fox, Paul Hagstrom, Martha McGinnis, and David Peset- 
sky, eds., Is the Best Good Enough? Proceedings from the Workshop on Optimality in Syntax. The MIT 
Press. Invited paper presented at the MIT Workshop on Optimality in Syntax, May 1995.

—. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Bresnan, Joan, and Sam A. Mchombo. 1995. The lexical integrity principle: Evidence from Bantu. Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 13(2): 181–254.






Bresnan, Joan, and Annie Zaenen. 1990.  Deep Unaccusativity in LFG.  In Katarzyna Dziwirek, Patrick
Farrell, and Errapel Mej´ıas-Bikandi, eds., Grammatical Relations: A Cross-Theoretical Perspective, 45–
57. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Buchanan, Charles L. 1918. Ornstein and Modern Music. The Musical Quarterly 4(2): 174–183.

Butt, Miriam. 1995. The Structure of Complex Predicates in Urdu. Dissertations in Linguistics. Stanford, 
CA: CSLI Publications. Revised and corrected version of 1993 Stanford University dissertation.

Butt, Miriam, Mary Dalrymple, and Anette Frank. 1997.  An architecture for linking theory in LFG.  In
Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King, eds., On-line Proceedings of the LFG97 Conference.

Butt, Miriam, and Tracy Holloway King. 2005. Restriction for Morphological Valency Alternations: The
Urdu Causative. In Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King, eds., On-line Proceedings of the LFG2005
Conference.

Butt, Miriam, Tracy Holloway King, and John T. Maxwell. 2003.  Productive encoding of Urdu complex 
predicates in the ParGram Project. In Proceedings of the EACL03 Workshop on Computational Linguis- 
tics for South Asian Languages: Expanding Synergies with Europe, 9–13.

Chomsky, Noam. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Crouch, Dick, Mary Dalrymple, Ron Kaplan, Tracy King, John Maxwell, and Paula Newman. 2012. XLE 
Documentation. Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, CA.

Culicover, Peter W., and Ray Jackendoff. 1999. The View from the Periphery: The English Comparative
Correlative. Linguistic Inquiry 30(4): 543–572.

Dalrymple, Mary, ed. 1999.  Semantics and Syntax in Lexical Functional Grammar: The Resource Logic
Approach. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Dalrymple, Mary. 2001. Lexical Functional Grammar, vol. 34 of Syntax and Semantics. New York, NY: 
Academic Press.

Dalrymple, Mary, Ronald M. Kaplan, and Tracy Holloway King. 2004.  Linguistic Generalizations over
Descriptions.  In Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King, eds., On-line Proceedings of the LFG2004
Conference.

Dalrymple, Mary, Ronald M. Kaplan, John T. Maxwell, III, and Annie Zaenen, eds. 1995. Formal Issues 
in Lexical-Functional Grammar. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Di Sciullo, Anna Maria, and Edwin Williams. 1987. On the Definition of Word. Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.

Falk, Yehuda N. 2001. Lexical-Functional Grammar: An Introduction to Parallel Constraint-Based Syntax.
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Fillmore, Charles. 1988. The mechanisms of ‘Construction Grammar’. In Shelley Axmaker, Annie Jaisser, 
and Helen Singmaster, eds., Proceedings of Fourteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Soci- 
ety, 35–55. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics Society.

Fillmore, Charles J., Paul Kay, and Mary Catherine O’Connor. 1988. Regularity and idiomaticity in gram- 
matical constructions: The case of let alone. Language 64: 501–538.






Ginzburg, Jonathan, and Ivan A. Sag. 2000. Interrogative Investigations: The Form, Meaning and Use of
English Interrogatives. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Goldberg, Adele E. 1995.   Constructions:  A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

—. 2006. Constructions at Work: The Nature of Generalization in Language. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Goldberg, Adele E., and Ray Jackendoff. 2004.  The English Resultative as a Family of Constructions.
Language 80(3): 532–568.

Halle, Morris, and Alec Marantz. 1993. Distributed Morphology and the Pieces of Inflection. In The View 
from Building 20: Essays in Linguistics in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger, 111–176. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press.

—. 1994.  Some key features of Distributed Morphology. In Andrew Carnie and Heidi Harley, eds., MIT 
Working Papers in Linguistics 21: Papers on Phonology and Morphology, 275–288. Cambridge, MA: 
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT.

Jackendoff, Ray. 1973. The base rules for prepositional phrases. In Stephen Anderson and Paul Kiparsky, 
eds., A Festschrift for Morris Halle, 345–356. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

—. 1992. Babe Ruth Homered His Way into the Hearts of America. In Stowell and Wehrli 1992, 155–178. 
Jackendoff, Ray S. 1990. Semantic Structures. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
—. 2007.  Language, Consciousness, Culture: Essays on Mental Structure.  Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.

Janssen, Theo M. V. 1997. Compositionality. In Handbook of Logic and Language, 419–473. Cambridge 
and Amsterdam: The MIT Press/Elsevier.

Joshi, Aravind K., K. Vijay-Shanker, and David Weir. 1991. The Convergence of Mildly Context-Sensitive 
Grammar Formalisms. In Peter Sells, Stuart Shieber, and Thomas Wasow, eds., Foundational Issues in 
Natural Language Processing, 31–81. MIT Press.

Kaplan, Ronald M. 1987.   Three Seductions of Computational Psycholinguistics.   In Peter Whitelock, 
Mary McGee Wood, Harold L. Somers, Rod Johnson, and Paul Bennett, eds., Linguistic Theory and 
Computer Applications, 149–188. London: Academic Press. Also published as CCL/UMIST Report No.
86.2: Alvey/ICL Workshop on Linguistic Theory and Computer Applications: Transcripts of Presen- 
tations and Discussions. Center for Computational Linguistics, University of Manchester. Reprinted in 
Dalrymple et al. (1995:337–367).

Kay, Paul, and Charles J. Fillmore. 1999. Grammatical Constructions and Linguistic Generalizations: the
What’s X doing Y? Construction. Language 75: 1–33.

Malouf, Robert. 1998. Categories, prototypes, and default inheritance. In Proceedings of the Joint Confer- 
ence on Formal Grammar, Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, and Categorial Grammar, 207–216. 
Saarbru¨ cken.

Marantz, Alec. 1992. The Way-Construction and the Semantics of Direct Arguments in English: A Reply 
to Jackendoff. In Stowell and Wehrli 1992, 179–188.






Marantz, Alec P. 1997. No escape from syntax: Don’t try morphological analysis in the privacy of your own 
lexicon. In A. Dimitriadis and L. Siegel, eds., University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics, 
vol. 4.2, 201–226. University of Pennsylvania.

Matsumoto, Yo. 1996.   Complex Predicates in Japanese:  A Syntactic and Semantic Study of the No- 
tion ‘Word’.  Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.  Studies in Japanese Linguistics series, CSLI Publica- 
tions/Kuroiso Publishers, Stanford/Tokyo. Revised and corrected version of 1992 Stanford University 
dissertation, On the wordhood of complex predicates in Japanese.

Michaelis, Laura. 2010. Sign-Based Construction Grammar. In Bernd Heine and Heiko Narrog, eds., The
Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Analysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Mohanan, Tara. 1994. Arguments in Hindi. Dissertations in Linguistics. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Reprinted version of 1990 Stanford University dissertation.

—. 1995. Wordhood and Lexicality: Noun Incorporation in Hindi. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
13(1): 75–134.

Partee, Barbara. 1983/1997.  Genitives — A Case Study.  In Johan van Benthem and Alice ter Meulen, 
eds., Handbook of Logic and Language, 464–470. Amsterdam and Boston:  Elsevier/The MIT Press. 
Appendix to Janssen (1997). Published version of 1983 manuscript.

Partee, Barbara, and Vladimir Borschev. 1998.  Integrating lexical and formal semantics: Genitives, rela- 
tional nouns, and type-shifting.  In Robin Cooper and Thomas Gamkrelidze, eds., Proceedings of the 
Second Tbilisi Symposium on Language, Logic, and Computation, 229–241. Tbilisi:  Center on Lan- 
guage, Logic, Speech, Tbilisi State University.

Pollard, Carl, and Ivan A. Sag. 1987. Information-Based Syntax and Semantics, Volume I. CSLI Lecture
Notes, number 13. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

—. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sadler, Louisa, and Andrew Spencer. 2000. Syntax as an exponent of morphological features. Yearbook of
Morphology 71–96.

Sag, Ivan A. 2010. English Filler-Gap Constructions. Language 86(3): 486–545.

—. 2012. Sign-Based Construction Grammar: An Informal Synopsis. In Boas and Sag 2012, 69–202.

Sag, Ivan A., Hans C. Boas, and Paul Kay. 2012. Introducing Sign-Based Construction Grammar. In Boas 
and Sag 2012, 1–30.

Shieber, Stuart M. 1985. Evidence against the context-freeness of natural language. Linguistics and Phi- 
losophy 8: 333–343.

Siddiqi, Daniel. 2009.  Syntax Within the Word: Economy, Allomorphy, and Argument Selection in Dis- 
tributed Morphology. John Benjamins.

Simpson, Jane. 1983. Aspects of Warlpiri Morphology and Syntax. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

Stowell, Tim, and Eric Wehrli, eds. 1992. Syntax and the Lexicon, vol. 26 of Syntax and Semantics. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.






Stump, Gregory T. 2001.  Inflectional Morphology: A Theory of Paradigm Structure.  Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.

Toivonen, Ida. 2002. The directed motion construction in Swedish. Journal of Linguistics 38: 313–345.

—. 2003.   Non-Projecting Words:  A Case Study of Swedish Particles.   Dordrecht:  Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

van Egmond, Marie-Elaine. 2006. Two way-constructions in Dutch. Master’s thesis, University of Canter- 
bury, Christchurch, New Zealand.

—. 2009. Two way-constructions in Dutch: Motion along a path and transition to location. Saarbru¨ cken, 
Germany: VDM Verlag Dr. Mu¨ ller.

Verhagen, Arie. 2003. The Dutch Way. In Arie Verhagen and Jeroen M. van de Weijer, eds., Usage-Based
Approaches to Dutch, 27–57. Utrecht: LOT.

Vijay-Shanker, K., and David Weir. 1994. The Equivalence of Four Extensions of Context-Free Grammars.
Mathematical Systems Theory 27(6): 511–546.






Appendices



A	Template Hierarchy
(69)		MEANS 
DUTCH-TLC




TRANSITION TRAVERSAL





MANNER





TRAVERSAL-MEANS


TRAVERSAL-MANNER




SWEDISH-DMC	DUTCH-WEG	ENGLISH-WAY


B	Templates

(70)	TRANSITION	:=	λRλxλeλe′.R(e)  ∧ agent(e) = x ∧ cause(e′ ) = x :
(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑ SU B J)σ  ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ
(71)	MEANS	:=	λP λeλe′ .P (e)(e′ ) ∧ means(e′ ) = e :
[(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸ [(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ]
(72)	MANNER	:=	λP λRλe′ .P (R)(e′ ) ∧ manner(e′) = R :
[(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸ [(↑σ R EL) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ]
(73)	TRAVERSAL	:=	@TRANSITION
λP λe′ .P (e′ ) ∧ traversal(e′) :
[(↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸ [(↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ]
(74)	TRAVERSAL-MEANS	:=	@TRAVERSAL
@MEANS

(75)	TRAVERSAL-MANNER	:=	@TRAVERSAL
@MANNER

(76)	SWEDISH-DMC(PFN)	:=	@TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)
@TRAVERSAL-MEANS
λQλP λy.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧
theme(e′ ) = y ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧ Q(z) :
[((↑ O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ (↑ O B L)σ ] ⊸
[(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
(↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ ↑σ
(77)	ENGLISH-WAY(PFN)	:=	@TRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)
{@TRAVERSAL-MEANS | @TRAVERSAL-MANNER}
λY λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧
theme(e′ ) = x ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧
Q(z) ∧ z = Y (x) :
[(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
[(((O B J  ↑) O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ ((O B J  ↑) O B L)σ ] ⊸
[((O B J  ↑)σ EV EN T1) ⊸ ((O B J  ↑)σ EV EN T2) ⊸ (O B J  ↑)σ ] ⊸
(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ (O B J  ↑)σ






(78)	DUTCH-WEG(PFN)	:=	@DITRANSITIVE-OBLIQUE(PFN)
{@TRAVERSAL-MEANS | @TRAVERSAL-MANNER}
λY λQλP λyλx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧
theme(e′ ) = y ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧
Q(z) ∧ z = Y (x)  ∧ coextensive(e, e′ ) :
[(↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
[(((O B Jθ  ↑) O B L)σ PATH ) ⊸ ((O B Jθ  ↑) O B L)σ ] ⊸
[((O B Jθ  ↑)σ EV EN T1) ⊸ ((O B Jθ  ↑)σ EV EN T2) ⊸ (O B Jθ  ↑)σ ] ⊸
(↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ (↑ SPEC )σ  ⊸ (O B Jθ  ↑)σ
(79)	DUTCH-TLC(PFN)	:=	@TRANSITIVE-PREDICATIVE(PFN)
@OBJ-CONTROL
@TRANSITION
@MEANS
λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ theme(e′ ) = x ∧ Q(x) : 
[(↑ O B J)σ  ⊸ (↑ X C O MP)σ ] ⊸
[(↑σ EV EN T1) ⊸ (↑σ EV EN T2) ⊸ ↑σ ] ⊸
(↑ O B J)σ   ⊸ ↑σ






C	Examples



C.1	Swedish

(80)	Sarah armba˚gade sig




genom




ma¨ngden.


S.	elbowed


SELF through crowd.D EF



(81)	IP



(↑ SU B J) = ↓
NP


↑
 
=
 
↓
I
′






Sarah


↑ = ↓
I0

armba˚gade


↑
 
=
 
↓
V
P

↑
 
=
 
↓
V
′





(↑ O B J) = ↓
@SWEDISH-DMC(↑ PRED FN)
(↓ PRO N TY PE ) = SIMP-R EFL
NP


sig


(↑ O B L) 
= ↓
P
P



↑ 
= 
↓
P
′





↑ = ↓
P0


(↑ O B J) = ↓
NP







(82)




PR 
ED 	‘elbow(SU B J,O B J,O B L) ’


geno
m




ma¨n
gden






R 
ELAT
IO N 	rel [  ]


SU B J 	 PR ED 	‘Sarah’l	


aEV EN T1 	e1 [  ] 






O B J




O B L



rPR ED 
	‘pr
o’	l 
	σ
PRO N TY 
PE 	SIMP-R EFL 	

	
PR ED 
	‘throug
h(O B J)’		σ



	
EV EN 
T2 	e2 [  ]
 	l
t PATH 	pa [  ]


	O B J 	 PR ED 	‘crowd’l 






C.2	English
(83)	Sarah elbowed her way through the crowd. 
(84)		IP



(↑ SU B J) = ↓
NP


Sarah


↑
 
=
 
↓
I
′

↑
 
=
 
↓
V
P



↑ = ↓
V′




↑ = ↓
V0


(↑ O B J) = ↓
DP


(
↑
 
O
 
B
 
L
)
 
=
 
↓
P
P





elbowed


↑ = ↓
D′


↑
 
=
 
↓
P
′





↑ = ↓
D0

her
(↑ SPEC PR ED ) = ‘pro’


↑ = ↓
NP


way


↑ = ↓
P0

through


(↑ O B J) = ↓
DP

↑ = ↓
D′











(85)








PR 
ED 	‘elbow(SU B J,O B J,O B L) ’	


↑ = ↓
D0

the


↑
 
=
 
↓
N
P


c
r
o
w
d
R 
ELAT
IO N 	rel [  ]


SU B J 	PR ED 	‘Sarah’l


	σ	aEV EN T1 	e1 [  
] 


	
	PR ED 	‘way’		



	
EV EN T2 	e2 [  ]


O B J




O B L


SPEC 	PR ED 
	‘pro’l
	
	σ

PR ED 
	‘t
hrough(O B 
J)’	



rV
A R 	v [  ]l
w
R
 
E
S
T
R
 	r [  ]


	O B J 	PR ED 	‘crowd’l 	σ


t PATH 	pa [  ]l




C.3	Glue Semantics Proofs






armba˚ gade 
λe.elbow(e) : 
rel


T
R
 
A
 
N
 
S
 
I
 
T
I
 
O
 
N
 
λ
R
λ
x
λ
e
λ
e
′
 
.
R
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
x
  
∧
cause(e′ ) = x :
rel ⊸ s ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a






[y1 : s 1
 	


λxλeλe′ .elbow(e)  
∧
agent(e) = x  ∧
cause(e′ ) = x 
:
s ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a





MEA N S
λP λeλe′ .P (e)(e′ ) 
∧


λeλe′ .elbow(e)  ∧
agent(e) = y1  ∧ cause(e′ ) = y1 :
e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a


m
e
a
n
s
(
e
′
)
 
=
 
e
 
:
 
(
e
1
 
⊸
 
e
2
 
⊸
 
a
)
 
⊸
 
(
e
1
 
⊸
 
e
2
 
⊸
 
a
)





[e′′  : e1 3



λ
e
λ
e
′
 
.
e
l
b
o
w
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
y
1
  
∧
 
c
a
u
s
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
y
1
  
∧
 
m
e
a
n
s
(
e
′
)
 
=
 
e
 
:
 
e
1
 
⊸
 
e
2
 
⊸
 
a


 		TR AV ER S A L


genom


ma¨ ngden


λe′.elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ means(e′) = e′′  : e2 ⊸ a


λP λe′ .P (e′ ) ∧ traversal(e′) :
(e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ (e2 ⊸ a)


SWED I S H -DMC
λQλP λy.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧



λzλy.through(y, z) :
m ⊸ pa ⊸ t



ιx.[crowd(x)] :
m


 		theme(e′ ) = y  ∧ path(e′ ) = z  ∧ Q(z) :	 	


λe′.elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ means(e′) = e′′   ∧ traversal(e′) : e2 ⊸ a




⊸I 3


(pa ⊸ t) ⊸ (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ p ⊸ a
λP λy.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧


λy.through(y, ιx.[crowd(x)]) : pa ⊸ t


λe′′ λe′ .elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧	,
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ means(e′) = e′′   ∧ traversal(e′) : e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a
 

theme(e′ ) = y ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧ through(z, ιx.[crowd(x)]) : (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) 
⊸ p ⊸ a





Sarah s 
arah : s





sig
λy.y × y :
s ⊸ s ⊗ 
p





[x1  : p 2


λ
y.
∃
e.
∃
e′ 
.∃
z.
el
bo
w
(e
)  
∧ 
a
ge
nt
(e
) 
= 
y1  
∧ 
ca
u
se
(e
′ ) 
= 
y1  
∧ 
m
e
a
n
s(
e′
) 
= 
e 
∧
t
r
a
v
e
r
s
a
l
(
e
′
)  
∧
 
t
h
e
m
e
(
e
′ 
) 
=
 
y 
∧
 
p
a
t
h
(
e
′ 
) 
=
 
z 
∧
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
(
z
, 
ι
x
.
[
c
r
o
w
d
(
x
)
]
) 
:
p 
⊸
 a
∃e.∃e′.∃z
.elbow(e
)  ∧ 
agent(e) 
= y1  ∧
cause(e
′ ) = y1  
∧ 
means(
e′) = e 
∧ 
travers
al(e′ ) 
∧


s arah × sarah : s ⊗ p


theme(e′ ) = x1   ∧ 
path(e′ ) = z ∧ 
through(z, 
ιx.[crowd(x)]) : a


⊗E ,1 2


∃e.∃e′.∃z.elbow(e)  ∧ agent(e) = sarah  ∧ cause(e′ ) = sarah  ∧ means(e′) = e ∧ traversal(e′)  ∧
theme(e′ ) = sarah  ∧ path(e′ ) = z ∧ through(z, ιx.[crowd(x)]) : a


Figure 1: Glue Semantics proof for (80), Swedish Directed Motion Construction














elbowed 
λe.elbow(e) : 
rel


T
R
 
A
 
N
 
S
 
I
 
T
I
 
O
 
N
 
λ
R
λ
x
λ
e
λ
e
′
 
.
R
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
x
 
∧
cause(e′ ) = x :
rel ⊸ s ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a





[y1 : s 1
 	


λxλeλe′ .elbow(e)  
∧
agent(e) = x ∧
cause(e′ ) = x 
:
s ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ 
a





MEA N S
λP λeλe′ .P (e)(e′ ) 
∧





her2


λeλe′ .elbow(e)  ∧
agent(e) = y1  ∧ cause(e′ ) = y1 :
e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a


means(e′) = e : (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ (e1 ⊸ e2 
⊸ a)



EN G LI S H -WAY
λY λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧



 [z : p]


λxλP ιy.[P (y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] :
p ⊸ (v ⊸ r) ⊸ w
λP ιy.[P (y)  ∧ Rc(z, y)] :



way
λx.way(x)  :


′	′


λeλe′ .elbow(e)  ∧ agent(e) = y1  ∧


theme(e ) = x ∧ path(e ) = z ∧


(v ⊸ r) ⊸ w


v ⊸ r



[e′′  : e1 3


cause(e′ ) 
= y1  ∧ 
means(e′) 
= e :
e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ 
a


Q(z)  ∧ 
z = Y 
(x) :
(p ⊸ w) ⊸ 
(pa ⊸ t) ⊸


ιy.[way(y)  
∧ Rc(z, y)] 
: w



⊸
I
 
4
,


 		TR AV ER S A L


(e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ p ⊸ a


λz.ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(z, y)] : p ⊸ w


through


the crowd


λe′.elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ means(e′ ) = e′′  : e2 ⊸ a


λP λe′ .P (e′ ) ∧ traversal(e′) : (e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ (e2 ⊸ a)


λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ theme(e′ ) = x ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ Q(z)  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] 
:


λzλy.through(y, z) :
c ⊸ pa ⊸ t


ιx.[crowd(x)] :
c


λe′ .elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ means(e′ ) = e′′   ∧ traversal(e′ ) : e2 ⊸ a



⊸I 3


(pa ⊸ t) ⊸ (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ p ⊸ a
λP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ theme(e′ ) = x ∧


λy.through(y, ιx.[crowd(x)]) : pa ⊸ t


λe′′ λe′.elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧	,
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ means(e′) = e′′   ∧ traversal(e′) : e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a
 

path(e′ ) = z ∧ through(z, ιx.[crowd(x)])  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ 
Rc(x, y)] : (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ p ⊸ a





Sarah s 
arah : s





her1
λy.y × y :
s ⊸ s ⊗ p





[x1  : p 2


λ
x
.
∃
e
.
∃
e
′
 
.
∃
z
.
e
l
b
o
w
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
y
1
  
∧
c
a
u
s
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
y
1
  
∧
 
m
e
a
n
s
(
e
′
)
 
=
 
e
 
∧
 
t
r
a
v
e
r
s
a
l
(
e
′
)
  
∧
 
t
h
e
m
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
x
 
∧
p
a
t
h
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
z
 
∧
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
(
z
,
 
ι
x
.
[
c
r
o
w
d
(
x
)
]
)
  
∧
 
z
 
=
 
ι
y
.
[
w
a
y
(
y
)
  
∧
 
R
c
(
x
,
 
y
)
]
 
:
p
 
⊸
 
a
∃e.∃e′.∃z.
elbow(e)  
∧ 
agent(e) 
= y1  ∧
cause(e′ 
) = y1  ∧ 
means(e
′) = e ∧ 
travers
al(e′ ) ∧ 
theme(e′ 
) = x1  
∧


s arah × sarah : s ⊗ p


p
a
t
h
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
z
 
∧
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
(
z
,
 
ι
x
.
[
c
r
o
w
d
(
x
)
]
)
  
∧
 
z
 
=
 
ι
y
.
[
w
a
y
(
y
)
  
∧
 
R
c
(
x
1
 
,
 
y
)
]
 
:
 
a
∃e.∃e′.∃z.elbow(e)  ∧ 
agent(e) = sarah ∧
cause(e′ ) = sarah ∧ 
means(e′) = e ∧ 
traversal(e′)  ∧ 
theme(e′ ) = sarah ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ 
through(z, 
ιx.[crowd(x)])  ∧ z = 
ιy.[way(y)  ∧ 
Rc(sarah, y)] : a


⊗E ,1 2




Figure 2: Glue Semantics proof for (83), English Way Construction (means interpretation)













[R′  : rel 4


T
R
A
N
S
I
T
I
O
 
N
 
λ
R
λ
x
λ
e
λ
e
′
.
R
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
x
  
∧
cause(e′ ) = x :
rel ⊸ s ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a





[y1 : s 1


λ
x
λ
e
λ
e
′
 
.
R
′
(
e
)
 
 
∧
agent(e) = x  ∧
c
a
u
s
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
x
 
:
s
 
⊸
 
e
1
 
⊸
 
e
2
 
⊸
 
a





[e′′  : e1 3


λeλe′ .R′ (e) ∧
agent(e) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1 :
e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a


λe′ .R′(e)  ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1 :
e2 ⊸ a




⊸I 4




MANNER
λP λRλe′ .P (R)(e′ ) ∧




her2


λR′.λe′ .R′(e)  ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1 :
rel ⊸ e2 ⊸ a


,		manner(e′) = R : (rel ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ (rel ⊸ 
e2 ⊸ a)



ENG LISH -WAY
λY λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ )  ∧



 [z : p]


λxλP ιy.[P (y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] :
p ⊸ (v ⊸ r) ⊸ w
λP ιy.[P (y)  ∧ Rc(z, y)] :



way
λx.way(x) :


′	′


elbowed


λRλe′ 
.R(e)  ∧ 
agent(e′′ ) 
= y1  ∧


theme(e ) 
= x  ∧ 
path(e ) = 
z ∧


(v ⊸ r) ⊸ 
w


v ⊸ r


λe.elbow(e) :
rel


cause(e′ ) = y1  
∧ manner(e′) 
= R :
rel ⊸ e2 ⊸ a




TRAVERSAL


Q(z)  ∧ z 
= Y (x) :
(p ⊸ w) ⊸ (pa 
⊸ t) ⊸
(e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) 
⊸ p ⊸ a
  

ιy.[way(y)  
∧ Rc(z, y)] : w 
λz.ιy.[way(y)  
∧ Rc(z, y)] : p 
⊸ w



⊸I 5
,




through




the crowd


λe′ .elbow(e′′ ) ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ manner(e′) = elbow : e2 ⊸ a


λP λe′ .P (e′ ) ∧ traversal(e′) :
(e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ (e2 ⊸ a)


λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′ .∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ theme(e′ ) = x  ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ Q(z)  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] :


λzλy.through(y, z) :
c ⊸ pa ⊸ t


ιx.[crowd(x)] :
c


λe′ .elbow(e′′ )  ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ manner(e′) = elbow  ∧ traversal(e′) : e2 ⊸ a



⊸I 3


(pa ⊸ t) ⊸ (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ p ⊸ a
λP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ ) ∧ theme(e′ ) = x  ∧


λy.through(y, ιx.[crowd(x)]) : pa ⊸ t


λe′′ λe′.elbow(e′′ )  ∧ agent(e′′ ) = y1  ∧	,
cause(e′ ) = y1  ∧ manner(e′) = elbow  ∧ traversal(e′ ) : e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a
 

path(e′ ) = z ∧ through(z, ιx.[crowd(x)])  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] : (e1 
⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ p ⊸ a





Sarah s 
arah : s





her1
λy.y × y :
s ⊸ s ⊗ p





[x1 : p 2


λ
x
.
∃
e
.
∃
e
′
 
.
∃
z
.
e
l
b
o
w
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
y
1
  
∧
c
a
u
s
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
y
1
  
∧
 
m
a
n
n
e
r
(
e
′
)
 
=
 
e
l
b
o
w
  
∧
 
t
r
a
v
e
r
s
a
l
(
e
′
)
  
∧
 
t
h
e
m
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
x
  
∧
p
a
t
h
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
z
 
∧
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
(
z
,
 
ι
x
.
[
c
r
o
w
d
(
x
)
]
)
  
∧
 
z
 
=
 
ι
y
.
[
w
a
y
(
y
)
  
∧
 
R
c
(
x
,
 
y
)
]
 
:
p
 
⊸
 
a
∃e.∃e′ 
.∃z.elbow
(e)  ∧ 
agent(e) 
= y1  ∧
cause(e′ 
) = y1  
∧ 
manner
(e′) = 
elbow  
∧ 
travers
al(e′)  
∧ 
theme(
e′ ) = x1  
∧


s arah × sarah : s ⊗ p


p
a
t
h
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
z
 
∧
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
(
z
,
 
ι
x
.
[
c
r
o
w
d
(
x
)
]
)
  
∧
 
z
 
=
 
ι
y
.
[
w
a
y
(
y
)
  
∧
 
R
c
(
x
1
 
,
 
y
)
]
 
:
 
a
∃e.∃e′.∃z.elbow(e)  ∧ 
agent(e) = sarah  ∧
cause(e′ ) = sarah  ∧ 
manner(e′) = elbow  
∧ traversal(e′)  ∧ 
theme(e′ ) = sarah  ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ 
through(z, 
ιx.[crowd(x)])  ∧ z = 
ιy.[way(y)  ∧ 
Rc(sarah, y)] : a


⊗E ,1 2



Figure 3: Glue Semantics proof for (83), English Way Construction (manner interpretation)




(86)	Chesterfield negotiated Britain’s way into the Treaty of Vienna.






negotiated 
λe.negotiate(e) : 
rel


T
R
A
N
S
I
T
I
O
 
N
 
λ
R
λ
x
λ
e
λ
e
′
 
.
R
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
x
  
∧
cause(e′ ) = x :
rel ⊸ c ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n



Chesterfield 
chesterf ield : 
c


λxλeλe′ 
.negotiate(e)  ∧
agent(e) = x  ∧
c
a
u
s
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
x
 
:
c ⊸ e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n


 		MEANS


λeλe′ .negotiate(e)  ∧
agent(e) = chesterf ield  ∧
cause(e′ ) = chesterf ield :
e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n


λP λeλe′ .P (e)(e′ )  ∧
means(e′ ) = e : (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n)  ⊸ (e1 ⊸ 
e2 ⊸ n)




’s
λxλP ιy.[P (y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] :


λeλe′ .negotiate(e)  ∧ agent(e) = chesterf ield  ∧


[z : b]


b ⊸ (v ⊸ r) ⊸ w


cause(e′ ) = chesterf ield  ∧ means(e′ ) = e :
1


ENG LISH -WAY
λY λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ )  ∧


 	   way


[e′′  : e1]


e
1
 
⊸
 
e
2
 
⊸
 
n
λe′.negoti
ate(e′′ )  ∧ 
agent(e′′ ) 
= 
chesterf 
ield  ∧



TRAVERSA
L


theme(e′ ) 
= x  ∧ 
path(e′ ) = 
z ∧
Q(z)  ∧ 
z = Y (x) 
:


λP ιy.[P 
(y)  ∧ 
Rc(z, y)] :
(v ⊸ r) 
⊸ w


λx.way(x
) :
v ⊸ r


cause(e′ ) = chesterf ield  ∧
means(e′) = e′′  : e2 ⊸ n


λP λe′.P (e′ )  ∧ traversal(e′ ) : (e2 ⊸ n)  ⊸ 
(e2 ⊸ n)


(b ⊸ w) ⊸ (pa ⊸ i) ⊸
(e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ a) ⊸ b ⊸ n


ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(z, y)] : w
⊸I 2
λz.ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(z, y)] : b ⊸ w 	,



into



the Treaty of Vienna


λe′ .negotiate(e′′ )  ∧ agent(e′′ ) = chesterf ield  ∧
cause(e′ ) = chesterf ield  ∧


λQλP λx.∃e.∃e′.∃z.P (e)(e′ )  ∧ theme(e′ ) = x  ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ Q(z)  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] :


λzλy.into(y, z) :
t ⊸ pa ⊸ i


t -o-v :
t


means(e′) = e′′   ∧ traversal(e′) : e2 ⊸ n
λe′′λe′ .negotiate(e′′ )  ∧ agent(e′′ ) = chesterf ield  ∧
cause(e′ ) = chesterf ield  ∧
means(e′) = e′′   ∧ traversal(e′) : e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n


⊸I 1
,


(pa ⊸ i) ⊸ (e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n) ⊸ b ⊸ n
λP λx.∃e.∃e′ .∃z.P (e)(e′ )  ∧ theme(e′ ) = x  ∧
path(e′ ) = z ∧ into(z, t-o-v)  ∧ z = ιy.[way(y)  ∧ Rc(x, y)] :
(e1 ⊸ e2 ⊸ n) ⊸ b ⊸ n


λy.into(y, t-o-v) : pa ⊸ i



Britain b 
ritain : b


λ
x
.
∃
e
.
∃
e
′
 
.
∃
z
.
n
e
g
o
t
i
a
t
e
(
e
)
  
∧
 
a
g
e
n
t
(
e
)
 
=
 
c
h
e
s
t
e
r
f
 
i
e
l
d
  
∧
c
a
u
s
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
c
h
e
s
t
e
r
f
 
i
e
l
d
  
∧
 
m
e
a
n
s
(
e
′
)
 
=
 
e
 
∧
 
t
r
a
v
e
r
s
a
l
(
e
′
 
)
  
∧
 
t
h
e
m
e
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
x
  
∧
p
a
t
h
(
e
′
 
)
 
=
 
z
 
∧
 
i
n
t
o
(
z
,
 
t
-
o
-
v
)
  
∧
 
z
 
=
 
ι
y
.
[
w
a
y
(
y
)
  
∧
 
R
c
(
x
,
 
y
)
]
 
:
b
 
⊸
 
n
∃e.∃e′.∃z.
negotiate(
e)  ∧ 
agent(e) = 
chesterf 
ield  ∧
cause(e′ ) 
= 
chesterf 
ield  ∧ 
means(e′
) = e ∧ 
traversal
(e′)  ∧ 
theme(e′ ) 
= britain  
∧
path(e′ ) 
= z ∧ 
into(z, 
t-o-v)  ∧ 
z = 
ιy.[way(
y)  ∧ 
Rc(brita
in, y)] : 
n


F
i
g
u
r
e
 
4
:
 
G
l
u
e
 
S
e
m
a
n
t
i
c
s
 
p
r
o
o
f
 
f
o
r
 
(
8
6
)
,
 
E
n
g
l
i
s
h
 
W
a
y
 
C
o
n
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
(
m
e
a
n
s
 
i
n
t
e
r
p
r
e
t
a
t
i
o
n
)







