Discursive Usage of Six Chinese Punctuation Marks




YUE Ming
Department of Applied Linguistics
Communication University of China
100024 Beijing, China
yueming@cuc.edu.cn







Abstract

Both rhetorical structure and punctuation 
have been helpful in discourse processing. 
Based on a corpus annotation project, this 
paper reports the discursive usage of 6
Chinese punctuation marks in news 
commentary texts: Colon, Dash, Ellipsis, 
Exclamation Mark, Question Mark, and 
Semicolon. The rhetorical patterns of 
these marks are compared against patterns 
around cue phrases in general. Results 
show that these Chinese punctuation 
marks, though fewer in number than cue 
phrases, are easy to identify, have strong 
correlation with certain relations, and can 
be used as distinctive indicators of 
nuclearity in Chinese texts.

1     Introduction

Rhetorical structure has been proven useful in 
NLP projects such as text generation, 
summarization, machine translation and essay 
scoring. Automatic discourse parsing remains an 
elusive task, however, despite much rule-based 
research on lexical cues such as anaphora and 
conjunctions. Parsing through machine learning 
has encountered a bottleneck, due to limited 
resources--there is  only  one  English  RST 
treebank      publicly      available,      and      one 
RST-annotated German corpus on its way.
  Punctuation marks (PMs) have been proven 
useful in RST annotation as well as in many other 
NLP tasks such as Part-of-Speech tagging, Word 
Sense Disambiguation, Near-duplicate detection, 
bilingual alignment (e.g. Chuang and Yeh, 2005),
etc.  Dale  (1991)  noticed  the  role  of  PMs  in
determining rhetorical relations. Say (1998) did a 
study on their roles in English discourse structure.


Marcu (1997) and Corston-Oliver (1998) based 
their automatic discourse parser partially on PMs 
and other orthographical cues. Tsou et al. (1999) 
and Chan et al. (2000) use PMs to disambiguate 
candidate Discourse Markers for a Chinese 
summarization system. Reitter (2003) also used 
PMs to distinguish ATTRIBUTION and 
ELABORATION   relations  in   his   Feature-rich 
SVM rhetorical analysis system.
  All these inspired us to survey on the rhetorical 
patterns around Chinese PMs, so as to provide 
more direct a priori scores for the coarse 
rhetorical analyzer by Zhang et al. (2000) in their 
hybrid summarization system.
This paper is organized into 5 parts: Section 2
gives an overview of a Chinese RST treebank 
under construction, and a survey on the syntax of 
six main PMs in the corpus: Colon, Dash, 
Ellipses, Exclamation Mark, Question Mark, and 
Semicolon. Section 3 reports rhetorical patterns 
around these PMs. Section 4 is a discussion on the 
effectiveness of these PMs in comparison with 
Chinese cue phrases. Section 5 is a summary and 
Section 6 directions for future work.

2	Overview  of  Chinese  RST  treebank 
under construction

2.1     Corpus data

For the purpose of language engineering and 
linguistic investigation, we are constructing a 
Chinese   corpus   comparable   to   the   English 
WSJ-RST treebank and the German Potsdam 
Commentary Corpus (Carlson et al. 2003; Stede
2004).  Texts  in  our  corpus  were  downloaded 
from  the  official  website  of  People’s  Daily 1 , 
where important Caijingpinlun2  (CJPL) articles

1   www.people.com.cn.
2   Caijinpinglun (CJPL) in Chinese means “financial and 
business commentary”, and usually covers various topics in
social economic life, such as fiscal policies, financial reports,



43

Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Student Research Workshop, pages 43–48, 
Sydney, July 2006. Qc 2006 Association for Computational Linguistics


by major media entities were republished. With 
over 400 authors and editors involved, our texts 
can be regarded as a good indicator of the general 
use of Chinese by Mainland native speakers.
At the moment our CJPL corpus has a total of
395 texts, 785,045 characters, and 84,182 
punctuation marks (including pruned spaces). 
Although on average there are 9.3 characters 
between every two marks, sentences in CJPL are 
long, with 51.8 characters per common sentence 
delimiters (Full Stop, Question Mark and 
Exclamation Mark).

2.2     Segmentation

We are informed of the German Potsdam 
Commentary Corpus construction, in which they 
(Reitter 2003) designed a program for automatic 
segmentation at clausal level after each 
Sign=“$.”(including {., ?, !, ;, :, …}) and 
Sign=“$,”(including {,}) 3 . Human  interference 
with the segmentation results was not allowed, 
but annotators could retie over-segmented bits by 
using the JOINT relation.
  Given the workload of discourse annotation, 
we decided to design a similar segmentation 
program. So we first normalized different 
encoding systems and variants of PMs (e.g. 
Dashes and Ellipses of various lengths), and then 
conducted a survey on the distribution (Fig. 1) 
and syntax of major Chinese punctuation marks 
(e.g. syntax of Chinese Dash in Table 1).

40.0%
35.0%
30.0%
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%


used  after  an  independent  NP  or  
discourse marker.  This  rate,  times  the  total  
number  of C-Comma-1, means we would have 
to retie a huge number of over-segmented 
elements. So we decided not to take C-Comma-1 
as a delimiter of our Elementary Unit of 
Discourse Analysis (EUDA) for the present.


















Table 1: Syntax of Chinese Dash

  42.9% of the colons in CJPL are used in the 
structural elements6 of the texts. Other than these,
56.5% of the colons are used between clausal 
strings, only 0.6% of the colons are used 
after
non-clausal 
strings.
  99.6% instances of Exclamation Mark, 
Question Mark, Dash, Ellipses and Semicolon 
in the Chinese corpus are used after clausal 
strings.
  In our corpus, 4.3% of the left quotation marks 
do not have a right match to indicate the end of a 
quote. Because many articles do not give clear 
indications of direct or indirect quotes7 , it is very 
difficult for the annotator to makeup.
Parentheses   and  brackets   have   a   similar


0.0%


PM
pro
ble
m, 
wit
h 
3.2
% 
mar
ks 
mis
sin
g 
thei
r 
mat
che
s.







Figure 1: Percentage of major punctuation 
marks in the Chinese corpus4

  C-Comma-1 is the most frequently used PM in 
the Chinese corpus. While it does delimit clauses, 
a study on 200 randomly selected C-Comma-1 
tokens in our corpus shows that 55 of them are


trading, management, economic conferences, transportation, 
entertainment, education, etc.
  Collected by professional editors, most texts in our corpus 
are commentaries; some are of marginal genres by the
Chinese standards.
3  Dash, as a Sign= “$(”, was not selected as a unit delimiter 
in the Potsdam Commentary Corpus.
4   PMs are counted by individual symbols.


5  The symbol “S” donates sentences with a common end 
mark, while “s” denotes structures orthographically end with 
one of the PMs studied here. “+” means one or more 
occurrences, “*” means zero or more occurrences. The 
category after a bracket pair indicates the syntactic role 
played by the unit enclosed, for example “[……]NP” means 
the ellipses functions as an NP within a clausal structure. 
“<para></para>” denotes paragraph opening and ending.
6  By “Structural elements” we mean documentary 
information, such as Publishing Date, Source, Link, Editor,
etc. Although these are parts of a news text, they are not the 
article proper, on which we annotate rhetorical relations.
7  After a comparative study on the rhetorical structure of 
news published by some Hong Kong newspapers in both
English and Chinese, Scollon and Scollon (1997) observed 
that “quotation is at best ambiguous in Chinese. No standard
practice has been observed across newspapers in this set and 
even within a newspaper, it is not obvious which portions of
the text are attributed to whom.” We notice that Mainland 
newspapers have a similar phenomenon.


Besides, 53.9% of the marks appear in structural 
elements that we didn’t intend to analyze8 .
  Finally,   we   decided   to   use   Period,   the 
End-of-line symbol, and these six marks 
(Question   Mark,   Exclamation   Mark,   Colon,
  

An intra-coder accuracy test has bee taken 
between the 1st and 2nd versions of 97 finished 
trees. The intra-coder accuracy rate (Rv) for a 
particular variable is defined as

2*(AT-AS)


Semicolon, Ellipsis and  Dash) as delimiters of
our  EUDA.  Quotation mark,  Parentheses,  and
Brackets were not selected.


Rv=

Where



TT-TS


*100%


  A special program was designed to conduct 
the   segmentation  after   each   delimiter,   with 
proper adjustment in cases when the delimiter is 
immediately followed by a right parenthesis, a 
right quotation mark, or another delimiter.
  A pseudo-relation, SAME-UNIT, has been used 
during annotation to re-tie any discourse segment 
cut by the segmentation program into fragments.

2.3     Annotation and Validity Control
We  use  O’Donnell’s RSTTool V3.43 9    as  our 
annotation software. We started from the 
Extended-RST relation set embedded in the 
software, adding gradually some new relations, 
and finally got an inventory of 47 relations. We 
take the same rhetorical predicate with switched 
arguments as different relations, for instance, 
SOLUTIONHOOD-S, SOLUTIONHOOD-M and 
SOLUTIONHOOD-N are regarded as 3 relations.
  Following Carlson et al. (2001) and Marcu’s 
(1999) examples, we’ve composed a 60-page 
Chinese RST annotation manual, which includes 
preprocessing procedures, segmentation rules, 
definitions and examples of the relations, tag 
definitions for structural elements, tagging 
conventions for special structures, and a relation 
selection protocol. When annotating, we choose 
the most indicative relation according to the 
manual. Trees are constructed with binary 
branches except for multinuclear relations.
  One experienced annotator had sketched trees 
for all the 395 files before the completion of the 
manual.  Then  she  annotated  97  shortest  files 
from 197 randomly selected texts, working 
independently and with constant reference to the 
manual.    After    a    one-month    break,    she 
re-annotated the 97 files, with reference to the 
manual and with occasional consultation with 
Chinese journalists and  linguists. The last 
version, though far from error-free, is currently 
taken as the right version for reliability tests and 
other statistics.


AT= number of agreed 
tags; TT= number of total 
tags;
TS=   number   of   total   tags   for   
structural elements;
AS=  number  of  agreed  tags  for  
structural elements.
Rr for relation tags is 84.39%, Ru for unit tags 
is
85.61%, and Rn for nuclearity tags is 
88.12%.
Because  SPSS   can   only   calculate   Kappa
Coefficient for symmetric data, we’ve only 
measured Kappa for relation tags to the EUDAs. 
The outcome, Kr=.738, is quite high.

3     
Results

The 97 double-annotated files have in the 
main body of their texts a total of 677 
paragraphs and
1,914 EUDAs. Relational patterns of those PMs 
are reported in Table 2-7 below10 . The “N”, “S” 
or “M” tags after each relation indicate the 
nuclearity status of each EUDA ended with a 
certain PM. The number of those PMs used in 
structural   elements   of   CJPL   texts   are   
also reported as they make up the total 
percentage.





8   Parentheses, and other PMs used in structural elements of 
CJPL texts, are of high relevance to discourse parsing, since 
they can be used in a preprocessor to filter out text
fragments that do not need be annotated in terms of RST.
9  Publicly downloadable at www.wagsoft.com.



Table 2: Rhetorical pattern of C-Question


10   Based on data from the 2nd version of annotated texts.



Ev
alu
ati
on
-N
1
2
.
5
0
%
0
.
7
2
%
Vo
liti
on
al-
res
ult
-S
1
2
.
5
0
%
1
.
3
2
%
T
T
L
1
0
0
.
0
0
%
N
/
A
Table 6: Rhetorical pattern of C-Ellipses













Table 3: Rhetorical pattern of C-Exclamation


Table 7: Rhetorical pattern of C-Dash

















Table 4: Rhetorical pattern of C-Colon
















Table 5: Rhetorical pattern of C-Semicolon










11 This is higher than the overall 42.93% rate for colons 
used in structural elements, for we’ve only finished 97 
shortest ones from the 197 randomly selected files.


The above data suggest at least the following:
1)   There is no one-to-one mapping between 
any of PM studied and a rhetorical relation. 
But some PMs have dominant rhetorical 
usages.
2)   C-Question  Mark  is  not  most  
frequently related with SOLUTIONHOOD, 
but with CONJUNCTION. That is because a 
high percentage of questions in our corpus 
are rhetorical and used in groups to achieve 
certain argumentative force.
3) C-Colon is most frequently related with 
ATTRIBUTION and ELABORATION, apart 
from its usage in structural elements.
4)  C-Semicolon is overwhelmingly associated 
with multinuclear relations, particularly 
with CONJUNCTION.
5)   C-Dash usually indicates an 
ELABORATION relation. But since it is 
often used in pairs, it is often bound to both 
the Nucleus and Satellite units of a relation.
6)  82.3% tokens of the six Chinese PMs are 
uniquely related to  EUDAs of  certain 
nucleus status in a rhetorical relation, taking 
even C-Dash into account.
7)   The following relations have more than 
10% of their instances related to one of 
the six PMs	studied        here:        
ADDITION, ATTRIBUTION, 
CONJUNCTION, DISJUNCTION, 
ELABORATION, LIST, OTHERWISE,  
PREPARTION, RESTATEMENT and 
SOLUTIONHOOD.
8)   Chinese PMs are used somewhat 
differently from their German equivalents, 
Exclamation Mark for instance (Fig.2):



35.0%
30.0%
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%
0.0%












Relation 
type





Chinese
German


relation
s  for  
their  
Chinese  
summar
izer.  
Their 
tests 
were 
successf
ul. But 
like 
PMs, 
Chinese 
cue 
phrases 
are not 
in a 
one-to-
one 
mappin
g 
relation
ship 
with 
rhetoric
al 
relation
s, 
either.
  In 
our 
finished 
portion 
of CJPL 
corpus, 
we’ve 
identifie
d 161 
Types 
of cue 
phrases1
2 at or 
above 
our 
EUDA 
level, 
recordin
g 539 
tokens. 
These 
cue 
phrases 
are 
scattere
d in 477 
EDUAs
, 
indicati
ng  
20.5%  
of  the  
total  
relation
s  in  
our


Figure 2: Rhetorical Function of Exclamation
Mark in Chinese and German corpora

4     Discussion

How useful are these six PMs in the prediction of 
rhetorical relations in Chinese texts? In our 
opinion, this question can be answered partly 
through a comparison with Chinese cue phrases.
  Cue  phrases  are  widely  discussed  and 
exploited in the literature of both Chinese studies 
and RST applications as a major surface device. 
Unfortunately, Chinese cue phrases in natural 
texts are difficulty to identify automatically. As 
known, Chinese words are made up of 1, 2, or 
more characters, but there is no explicit word 
delimiter between any pair of adjacent words in a 
string of characters. Thus, they are not known 
before tokenization (“fenci” in Chinese, meaning 
“separating into words”, or “word segmentation” 
so as to recognize meaningful words out of 
possible  overlaps  or  combinations).  The  task 
may sound simple, but has been the focus of 
considerable research efforts (e.g. Webster and 
Kit, 1992; Guo 1997; Wu, 2003).
  Since  many  cue  phrases  are  made  up  of 
high-frequency characters (e.g. “而-ER” in “而
-er”   meaning   “but/so/and”,   “ 然 而-ran’er” 
meaning “but/however”, “因而-yin’er” meaning 
“so/because of this”, “而且-erqie” meaing “in 
addition” etc.; “此-ci” in “此后-cihou” meaning 
“later/hereafter”,  “ 因此-yinci”  meaning  “as  a 
result”,  “ 由此看来-youcikanlai” meaning  “on
this ground/hence”, etc.), a considerable amount 
of computation must be done before these cue 
phrases can ever been exploited.
  Apart from tokenization, POS and WSD are 
other necessary steps that should be taken before 
making use of some common cue phrases. They 
are all hard nuts in Chinese language engineering. 
Interestingly,  many  researches  done  in  these 
three areas have made use of the information 
carried by PMs (e.g. Sun et al. 1998).
Chan  et  al.  (2000)  did  a  study  on  identify
Chinese  connectives  as  signals  of  rhetorical


finished portion of the corpus. Our six PMs, on 
the other hand, have 551 tokens in the same 
finished  portion,  delimiting  345  EUDAs  (and
206 structural elements), and indicating 14.8% of 
the total relations. However, since there are far 
more types of cue phrases than types of 
punctuation marks, 90.1% of cue phrases are 
sparser at  or  above our EDUA level than the 
least frequently used PM—Ellipsis in this case.
And Chinese cue phrases don’t signal all the
rhetorical relations at all levels. For instance, 
CONJUNTION   is   the   most   frequently   used 
relation in our annotated text (taking 22.1% of all 
the  discursive  relations),  but  it  doesn’t  have 
strong correlation with any lexical item. Its most
frequent  lexical  cue  is  “ 也-ye”,  taking  2.4%.
ELABORATION is another common relation in 
CJPL, but it is rarely marked by cue phrases. 
ATTRIBUTION, SOLUTIONHOOD and 
DISJUNCTION are amongst other lowest marked 
relations in Chinese—they happen to be signaled 
quite significantly by a punctuation mark.
  Given the cost to recognize Chinese cue 
phrases accurately, the sparseness of many of 
these cues, and the risk of missing all cue phrases 
for a particular discursive relation, punctuation 
marks with strong rhetorical preferences appear 
to be useful supplements to cue phrases.

5     Conclusion

Because rhetorical structure in Chinese texts is 
not explicit by itself, systematic and quantitative 
evaluation of various factors that can contribute 
to the automatic analysis of texts is quite 
necessary. The purpose of this study is to look 
into the discursive patterns of Chinese PMs, to 
see   if   they   can   facilitate  discourse  parsing 
without deep semantic analysis.
  We have in this study observed the discursive 
usage of six Chinese PMs, from their overall 
distribution  in  our  Chinese  discourse  corpus, 
their syntax in context, to their rhetorical roles at

12 We are yet to give a theoretical definition of Cue Phrases 
in our study. But the identified ones range similarly to those 
English cue phrases listed in Marcu (1997).


or above our EUDA level. Current statistics seem 
to suggest clear patterns of their rhetorical roles, 
and their distinctive correlation with nuclearity in 
most relations.  These  patterns  and  correlation 
may be useful in NLP projects.

6     Future Work

We are conscious of the size and granularity of 
our treebank on which this analysis is based. We 
plan to get a larger team to work on the project, 
so as to make it more comparable to the English 
and German RST treebanks.
  Since the distinctive nucleus status of EUDAs 
ended with these PMs may be useful in deciding 
growth point for RS-tree construction or for tree 
pruning in summarization, we are also interested 
in testing how well a baseline relation classifier 
performs if it always predicts the most frequent 
relations for these PMs.

Acknowledgement

Special thanks to Dr. Manfred Stede for licensing 
us to use the Potsdam Commentary Corpus. And 
thanks to Dr. Michael O’Donnell, FAN Taizhi, 
HU Fengguo, JIN Narisong, and MA Guangbin 
for their technical support. The author also fully 
appreciates the anonymous reviewers for their 
constructive comments.

References

Lynn Carlson and Daniel Marcu. 2001. Discourse 
tagging  reference  manual,  Technical  Report 
ISI/TR-545. www.isi.edu/~marcu.

Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary. E. Okurowski.
2003. Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the 
framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory. In Jan 
van Kuppevelt and Ronnie Smith, editors, Current 
Directions in Discourse and Dialogue. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. www.isi.edu/~marcu.

Samuel W. K. Chan, Tom B. Y. Lai, W. J. Gao and B.
K. T’sou. 2000. Mining discourse markers for 
Chinese Textual Summarization. Workshop on 
Automatic Summarization, ACL 2000.

Thomas C. Chuang and Kevin C. Yeh. 2005. Aligning 
Parallel Bilingual Corpora Statistically with 
Punctuation  Criteria.  Computational  Linguistics 
and Chinese Language Processing. Vol. 10, No. 1, 
March 2005, pp. 95-122.

Simon H. Corston-Oliver. 1998. Computing 
Representation of the Structure of Written 
Discourse. Technical Report.    MSR-TR-98-15.

Robert Dale. 1991. The role of punctuation in 
discourse structure. Working Notes for the AAAI


Fall Symposium on Discourse Structure in Natural 
Language Understanding and Generation. P13-13. 
Asilomar.

Jin   GUO.   1997.   Critical   Tokenization   and   its
Properties.    Computational    Linguistics,    23(4):
569-596.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional 
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Daniel Marcu. 1997. The rhetorical parsing, 
summarization,  and  generation  of  natural 
language texts. PhD thesis. University of Toronto. 
December 1997. www.isi.edu/~marcu

Daniel Marcu. 1999. Instructions for manually 
annotating the discourse structures of texts. 
www.isi.edu/~marcu

David   Reitter.   2003.   Rhetorical   Analysis   with 
Rich-Feature Support Vector Models. University of 
Potsdam, Diploma thesis in computational 
linguistics.

Bilge Say. 1998. An Information-Based Approach to 
Punctuation. Ph.D. dissertation, Bilkent University, 
Ankara, Turkey. 
http://www.cs.bilkent.edu.tr/~say/bilge.html.

Ron Scollon and Suzanne Wong Scollon. 1997. Point 
of view and citation: Fourteen Chinese and English 
versions  of  the  ‘same’ news  story.  Text,  17  (1),
83-125.

Manfred  Stede.  2004.  The  Potsdam  Commentary
Corpus. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Workshop
‘Discourse Annotation’. Barcelona.

SUN Maosong, Dayang SHEN, and Benjamin K. Tsou,
1998. Chinese word segmentation without using 
lexicon and hand-crafted training data. In 
Proceedings of COLING-ACL’98.

Benjamin K.Tsou, Weijun Gao, T.V.Y Lai and S.W.K.
Chan. 1999. Applying machine learning to identify
Chinese discourse markers. Proceedings of  1999
International      Conference      on      Information
Intelligence and Systems. p 548-53, 31 Oct.-3 Nov.
1999 , Bethesda, MD, USA.

Jonathan   J.   Webster   and   Chunyu   Kit.   1992.
Tokenization as the initial phase in NLP. In 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING'92), pages
1,106-1,110, Nantes, France.

WU  Andi.  2003.  Chinese  Word  Segmentation  in 
MSR-NLP. In Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, 
Sapporo, Japan.

ZHANG Yimin, LU Ru-Zhan and SHEN Li-Bin. 2000.
A hybrid method for automatic Chinese discourse 
structure analysis. Journal of Software, v 11, n 11, 
Nov. 2000, p 1527-33.

