New Models for Improving Supertag Disambiguation 

John Chen* 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences University of Delaware Newark, DE 19716 jchen@cis.udel.edu 

Srinivas Bangalore 
AT&T Labs Research 
180 Park Avenue 
P.O. Box 971 
Florham Park, NJ 07932 
srini@research.att.com 


Abstract 
In previous work, supertag disambigua- tion has been presented as a robust, par- tial parsing technique. In this paper we present two approaches: contextual models, which exploit a variety of fea- tures in order to improve supertag per- formance, and class-based models, which assign sets of supertags to words in order to substantially improve accuracy with only a slight increase in ambiguity. 


Introduction 
Many natural language applications are beginning to exploit some underlying structure of the lan- guage. Roukos (1996) and Jurafsky et al. (1995) use structure-based language models in the context of speech applications. Grishman (1995) and Hobbs et al. (1995) use phrasal information in information extraction. Alshawi (1996) uses dependency information in a machine translation system. The need to impose structure leads to the need to have robust parsers. There have been two main robust parsing paradigms: Fi-nite State Grammar-based approaches (such as Abney (1990), Grishman (1995), and Hobbs et al. (1997)) and Statistical Parsing (such as Charniak (1996), Magerman (1995), and Collins (1996)). 
Srinivas (1997a) has presented a different ap- proach called supertagging that integrates linguis- tically motivated lexical descriptions with the ro- bustness of statistical techniques. The idea un-derlying the approach is that the computation of linguistic structure can be localized if lexical items are associated with rich descriptions (Su-pertags) that impose complex constraints in a lo- cal context. Supertag disambiguation is resolved 
"Supported by NSF grants ~SBR-9710411 and ~GER-9354869 

K. Vijay-Shanker 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences University of Delaware Newark, DE 19716 vijay~cis.udel.edu 
by using statistical distributions of supertag co-occurrences collected from a corpus of parses. It results in a representation that is effectively a parse (almost parse). 
Supertagging has been found useful for a num- ber of applications. For instance, it can be used to speed up conventional chart parsers be- cause it reduces the ambiguity which a parser must face, as described in Srinivas (1997a). Chandrasekhar and Srinivas (1997) has shown that supertagging may be employed in informa- tion retrieval. Furthermore, given a sentence aligned parallel corpus of two languages and al- most parse information for the sentences of one of the languages, one can rapidly develop a gram- mar for the other language using supertagging, as suggested by Bangalore (1998). 
In contrast to the aforementioned work in su- pertag disambiguation, where the objective was to provide a-direct comparison between trigram models for part-of-speech tagging and supertag- ging, in this paper our goal is to improve the per- formance of supertagging using local techniques which avoid full parsing. These supertag disam- biguation models can be grouped into contextual models and class based models. Contextual mod- els use different features in frameworks that ex-ploit the information those features provide in order to achieve higher accuracies in supertag-ging. For class based models, supertags are first grouped into clusters and words are tagged with clusters of supertags. We develop several auto- mated clustering techniques. We then demon-strate that with a slight increase in supertag ambi- guity that supertagging accuracy can be substan- tially improved. 
The layout of the paper is as follows. In Sec- tion 2, we briefly review the task of supertagging and the results from previous work. In Section 3, we explore contextual models. In Section 4, we outline various class based approaches. Ideas for future work are presented in Section 5. Lastly, we present our conclusions in Section 6. 

2 Supertagging 
Supertags, the primary elements of the LTAG formalism, attempt to localize dependencies, in- cluding long distance dependencies. This is ac-complished by grouping syntactically or semanti- cally dependent elements to be within the same structure. Thus, as seen in Figure 1, supertags contain more information than standard part-of- speech tags, and there are many more supertags per word than part-of-speech tags. In fact, su-pertag disambiguation may be characterized as providing an almost parse, as shown in the bottom part of Figure 1. 
Local statistical information, in the form of a trigram model based on the distribution of su- pertags in an LTAG parsed corpus, can be used to choose the most appropriate supertag for any given word. Joshi and Srinivas (1994) define su-pertagging as the process of assigning the best supertag to each word. Srinivas (1997b) and Srinivas (1997a) have tested the performance of a trigram model, typically used for part-of-speech tagging on supertagging, on restricted domains such as ATIS and less restricted domains such as Wall Street Journal (WSJ). 
In this work, we explore a variety of local techniques in order to improve the performance of supertagging. All of the models presented here perform smoothing using a Good-Turing dis- counting technique with Katz's backoff model. With exceptions where noted, our models were trained on one million words of Wall Street Jour- nal data and tested on 48K words. The data and evaluation procedure are similar to that used in Srinivas (1997b). The data was derived by mapping structural information from the Penn Treebank WSJ corpus into supertags from the XTAG grammar (The XTAG-Group (1995)) us-ing heuristics (Srinivas (1997a)). Using this data, the trigram model for supertagging achieves an accuracy of 91.37%, meaning that 91.37% of the words in the test corpus were assigned the correct supertag.1 
3 Contextual Models 
As noted in Srinivas (1997b), a trigram model of- ten fails to capture the cooccurrence dependencies 
1The supertagging accuracy of 92.2% reported in Srinivas (1997b) was based on a different supertag tagset; specifically, the supertag corpus was reanno- tated with detailed supertags for punctuation and with a different analysis for subordinating conjunc- tions. 

between a head and its dependents--dependents which might not appear within a trigram's window size. For example, in the sentence "Many Indians ]eared their country might split again" the pres- ence of might influences the choice of the supertag for ]eared, an influence that is not accounted for by the trigram model. As described below, we show that the introduction of features which take into account aspects of head-dependency relationships improves the accuracy of supertagging. 
3.1 One Pass Head Trigram Model 
In a head model, the prediction of the current su- pertag is conditioned not on the immediately pre- ceding two supertags, but on the supertags for the two previous head words. This model may thus be considered to be using a context of variable length. 2 The sentence "Many Indians feared their country might split again" shows a head model's strengths over the trigram model. There are at least two frequently assigned supertags for the word ]eared: a more frequent one corresponding to a subcategorization of NP object (as ~n of Figure 1) and a less frequent one to a S comple- ment. The supertag for the word might, highly probable to be modeled as an auxiliary verb in this case, provides strong evidence for the latter. Notice that might and ]eared appear within a head model's two head window, but not within the tri- gram model's two word window. We may there- fore expect that a head model would make a more accurate prediction. 
Srinivas (1997b) presents a two pass head tri- gram model. In the first pass, it tags words as either head words or non-head words. Training data for this pass is obtained using a head percola- tion table (Magerman (1995)) on bracketed Penn Treebank sentences. After training, head tagging is performed according to Equation 1, where 15 is the estimated probability and H(i) is a charac-teristic function which is true iff word i is a head word. 
n 

H ~ argmaxH H~(wilH(i))~(H(i)lH(i-1)H(i-2)) 
i=1 

(1) The second pass then takes the words with this head information and supertags them according to Equation 2, where tH(io) is the supertag of the 
ePart of speech tagging models have not used heads in this manner to achieve variable length contexts. Variable length n-gram models, one of which is de- scribed in Niesler and Woodland (1996), have been used instead. 
NPA  SA  SA  
NP* SA  NP  S  
NP VP  NP  NP  VP  V  AP  NP  
V J  NP J  N~ price  T NP includes E  ~ iA ancillary  N companies  
ou2  0 3  o~4  cc 5  
S  S  
NP  S  NP  S  
NP  VP  ~  NP  VP  
NP  N  ~ V  NP  NP  VP  NP  N  
D I the  NP*  N N* I pa~lmse h  NI price °t6  ~ V NP ine/deslu c~7  D NP* Itwo h  A N* Iancillary 134  E NI companies cc8  
S  
NP  S  
S  NT  VP  /,~  
NP  N  ~  VP  ~ v  Ap  NP  VP  
N  N  N*  V  NP  ~  A  V  NP  
I purcha~  I price  I includes  / ancillary  I companies  
• a9  1310  all  a12  ct13  
i  i  i  "  
s  
NP  N  NP  NP VP  NP  N  NP  
D  NP*  N  N*  N  V  NP  D  NP*  A  N ~  N  
I  I  I  I  I  I  I  
the  purchase  price  includes  two  ancillary  companies  
h  h  c¢2  C~ll  ~3  ~4  a5  
the  purchase  price  includes  two  ancillary  companies  

Figure 1: A selection of the supertags associated with each word of the sentence: the purchase price includes two ancillary companies 
jth head from word i. 
n 
T ,~ argmaxT ll g(wilti)~(tiItH(i,_HtH(i--2)) 
i=l 
(2) This model achieves an accuracy of 87%, lower than the trigram model's accuracy. 
Our current approach differs significantly. In-stead of having heads be defined through the use of the head percolation table on the Penn Tree- bank, we define headedness in terms of the su-pertags themselves. The set of supertags can nat- urally be partitioned into head and non-head su-pertags. Head supertags correspond to those that represent a predicate and its arguments, such as a3 and a7. Conversely, non-head supertags corre- spond to those supertags that represent modifiers or adjuncts, such as ~1 and ~2. 
Now, the tree that is assigned to a word during supertagging determines whether or not it is to be a head word. Thus, a simple adaptation of the Viterbi algorithm suffices to compute Equation 2 in a single pass, yielding a one pass head trigram model. Using the same training and test data, the one pass head model achieved 90.75% accuracy, constituting a 28.8% reduction in error over the two pass head trigram model. This improvement may come from a reduction in error propagation or the richer context that is being used to predict heads. 


3.2 Mixed Head and Trigram Models 
The head mod.el skips words that it does not con- sider to be head words and hence may lose valu- able information. The lack of immediate local con- text hurts the head model in many cases, such as selection between head noun and noun modifier, and is a reason for its lower performance relative to the trigram model. Consider the phrase "..., or $ 2.48 a share." The word 2.48 may either be associated with a determiner phrase supertag (~1) or a noun phrase supertag (ag). Notice that 2.48 is immediately preceded by $ which is extremely likely to be supertagged as a determiner phrase 
031). This is strong evidence that 2.48 should be supertagged as a9. A pure head model cannot consider this particular fact, however, because 131 is not a head supertag. Thus, local context and long distance head dependency relationships are both important for accurate supertagging. 
A 5-gram mixed model that includes both the trigram and the head trigram context is one ap-proach to this problem. This model achieves a performance of 91.50%, an improvement over both Table 1: In the 3-gram mixed model, previous con- ditioning context and the current supertag deter- ministically establish the next conditioning con-text. H, LM, and RM denote the entities head, left modifier, and right modifier, respectively. 

Previous  Current  Next  
Context  Supertag  Context  
tH(i _2) tH(i _~)  tH(i,o)  tH(i, -* ) tH(i,o)  
tH(i,_2) tH(i _~)  tLM(~,o)  tH(i _,) tLM(i,o)  
tH(i,_2) tH(i,_~) tH(i _~) tLM(~ _~)  tRM(I,o) tH(i,o)  tH(i _2) tH(i _1) tH(i,_,) tH(i,o)  
tH(i,_l) tLM(i _l)  tLM(i,o)  tH(.,_ t) tLM(I,o)  
tH(i.-l} tLM(i,-1)  tRMii.o)  tH(i._ ~~ tRM(i,o)  

the trigram model and the head trigram model. We hypothesize that the improvement is limited because of a large increase in the number of pa- rameters to be estimated. 
As an alternative, we explore a 3-gram mixed model that incorporates nearly all of the relevant information. This mixed model may be described as follows. Recall that we partition the set of all supertags into heads and modifiers. Modifiers have been defined so as to share the characteristic that each one either modifies exactly one item to the right or one item to the left. Consequently, we further divide modifiers into left modifiers (134) and right modifiers. Now, instead of fixing the conditioning context to be either the two previous tags (as in the trigram model) or the two pre-vious head tags (as in the head trigram model) we allow it to vary according to the identity of the current tag and the previous conditioning con- text, as shown in Table 1. Intuitively, the mixed model is like the trigram model except that a mod- ifier tag is discarded from the conditioning context when it has found an object of modification. The mixed model achieves an accuracy of 91.79%, a significant improvement over both the head tri-gram model's and the trigram model's accuracies, p < 0.05. Furthermore, this mixed model is com- putationally more efficient as well as more accu- rate than the 5-gram model. 
3.3 Head Word Models 
Rather than head supertags, head words often seem to be more predictive of dependency rela- tions. Based upon this reflection, we have imple- mented models where head words have been used as features. The head word model predicts the cur- rent supertag based on two previous head words (backing off to their supertags) as shown in Equa- Table 2: Single classifier contextual models that have been explored along with the contexts they consider and their accuracies 
Model  Context  Accuracy  
Trigram  ti- 1 ti-2  91.37  
Head  
Trigram  tH(i,-1)tH(i,-2)  90.75  
5-gram  ti-lti-2  
Mix  tH(i,--1)tH(i,-2)  91.50  
3-gram  
Mix  tcntzt(i,-1)tcntzt(i,-2)  91.79  
Head  
Word  W(i,--1)W(i,-2)  88.16  
Mix  ti- 1 ti-2  
Word  WH(i,-1)WH(i,-2)  89.46  

tion 3. 
T ~ argmaxT 	rXP(wilti)p(ti]WH(i,_l)WH(i,_2)) i=l 

(3) The mixed trigram and head word model takes into account local (supertag) context and long distance (head word) context. Both of these models ap- pear to suffer from severe sparse data problems. It is not surprising, then, that the head word model achieves an accuracy of only 88.16%, and the mixed trigram and head word model achieves an accuracy of 89.46%. We were only able to train the latter model with 250K of training data because of memory problems that were caused by computing the large parameter space of that model. 
The salient characteristics of models that have been discussed in this subsection are summarized in Table 2. 

3.4 Classifier Combination 
While the features that our new models have con- sidered are useful, an n-gram model that considers all of them would run into severe sparse data prob- lems. This difficulty may be surmounted through the use of more elaborate backoff techniques. On the other hand, we could consider using decision trees at choice points in order to decide which fea- tures are most relevant at each point. However, we have currently experimented with classifier combi- nation as a means of ameliorating the sparse data problem while making use of the feature combina- tions that we have introduced. 
In this approach, a selection of the discussed models is treated as a different classifier and is trained on the same data. Subsequently, each clas- sifter supertags the test corpus separately. Finally, 
Trigram  Head Trigram  Head Word  3-gram Mix  Mix Word  
Trigram  91.37  91.87"  91.65  91.96  91.55  
Head Trigram  90.75  90.96  91.95  91.35"  
Head Word  88.16  91.88  90.51"  
3-gram Mix  91.79  91.87  
Mix Word  89.46  

Table 3: Accuracies of Single Classifiers and Pairwise Combination of Classifiers. 
their predictions are combined using various vot- ing strategies. 
The same 1000K word test corpus is used in models of classifier combination as is used in pre- vious models. We created three distinct partitions of this 1000K word corpus, each partition consist- ing of a 900K word training corpus and a 100K word tune corpus. In this manner, we ended up with a total of 300K word tuning data. 
We consider three voting strategies suggested by van Halteren et al. (1998): equal vote, where each classifier's vote is weighted equally, overall accuracy, where the weight depends on the over- all accuracy of a classifier, and pair'wise voting. Pairwise voting works as follows. First, for each pair of classifiers a and b, the empirical prob- ability ~(tcorrectltctassilier_atclassiyier_b) is com- puted from tuning data, where tclassiyier-a and tct~ssiy~e~-b are classifier a's and classifier b's su-pertag assignment for a particular word respec- tively, and t .... ect is the correct supertag. Sub-sequently, on the test data, each classifier pair votes, weighted by overall accuracy, for the su-pertag with the highest empirical probability as determined in the previous step, given each indi- vidual classifier's guess. 
The results from these voting strategies are pos- itive. Equal vote yields an accuracy of 91.89%. Overall accuracy vote has an accuracy of 91:93%. Pairwise voting yields an accuracy of 92.19%, the highest supertagging accuracy that has been achieved, a 9.5% reduction in error over the tri- gram model. 
The table of accuracy of combinations of pairs of classifiers is shown in Table 3. 3 The effi-cacy of pairwise combination (which has signifi- cantly fewer parameters to estimate) in ameliorat- ing the sparse data problem can be seen clearly. For example, the accuracy of pairwise combina- tion of head classifier and trigram classifier ex- ceeds that of the 5-gram mixed model. It is also 
3Entries marked with an asterisk ("*") correspond to cases where the pairwise combination of classifiers was significantly better than either of their component classifiers, p < 0.05. 
marginally, but not significantly, higher than the 3-gram mixed model. It is also notable that the pairwise combination of the head word classifier and the mix word classifier yields a significant im- provement over either classifier, p < 0.05, consid- ering the disparity between the accuracies of its component classifiers. 


3.5 Further Evaluation 
We also compare various models' performance on base-NP detection and PP attachment disam- biguation. The results will underscore the adroit- ness of the classifier combination model in using both local and long distance features. They will also show that, depending on the ultimate appli- cation, one model may be more appropriate than another model. 
A base-NP is a non-recursive NP structure whose detection is useful in many applications, such as information extraction. We extend our su- pertagging models to perform this task in a fash- ion similar to that described in Srinivas (1997b). Selected models have been trained on 200K words. Subsequently, after a model has supertagged the test corpus, a procedure detects base-NPs by scan- ning for appropriate sequences of supertags. Re-sults for base-NP detection are shown in Table 4. Note that the mixed model performs nearly as well as the trigram model. Note also that the head trigram model is outperformed by the other mod- els. We suspect that unlike the trigram model, the head model does not perform the accurate mod- eling of local context which is important for base- NP detection. 
In contrast, information about long distance de- pendencies are more important for the the PP at- tachment task. In this task, a model must de-cide whether a PP attaches at the NP or the VP level. This corresponds to a choice between two PP supertags: one associated with NP attach-ment, and another associated with VP attach-ment. The trigram model, head trigram model, 3-gram mixed model, and classifier combination model perform at accuracies of 78.53%, 79.56%, 80.16%, and 82.10%, respectively, on the PP at-Table 4: Some contextual models' results on base- NP chunking 

Recall  Precision  
Trigram  93.75  93.00  
3-gram Mix  93.65  92.63  
Head Trigram  91.17  89.72  
Classifier Combination  94.00  93.17  

tachment task. As may be expected, the trigram model performs the worst on this task, presum-ably because it is restricted to considering purely local information. 



4 Class Based Models 
Contextual models tag each word with the sin-gle most appropriate supertag. In many applica- tions, however, it is sufficient to reduce ambiguity to a small number of supertags per word. For example, using traditional TAG parsing methods, such are described in Schabes (1990), it is ineffi- cient to parse with a large LTAG grammar for En- glish such as XTAG (The XTAG-Group (1995)). In these circumstances, a single word may be as- sociated with hundreds of supertags. Reducing ambiguity to some small number k, say k < 5 su- pertags per word 4 would accelerate parsing con-siderably. 5 As an alternative, once such a reduc- tion in ambiguity has been achieved, partial pars- ing or other techniques could be employed to iden- tify the best single supertag. These are the aims of class based models, which assign a small set of supertags to each word. It is related to work by Brown et al. (1992) where mutual information is used to cluster words into classes for language modeling. In our work with class based models, we have considered only trigram based approaches so far. 

4.1 Context Class Model 
One reason why the trigram model of supertag- ging is limited in its accuracy is because it con-siders only a small contextual window around the word to be supertagged when making its tagging decision. Instead of using this limited context to pinpoint the exact supertag, we pos- tulate that it may be used to predict certain 
4For example, the n-best model, described below, achieves 98.4% accuracy with on average 4.8 supertags per word. 
5An alternate approach to TAG parsing that ef- fectively shares the computation associated with each lexicalized elementary tree (supertag) is described in Evans and Weir (1998). It would be worth comparing both approaches. 

structural characteristics of the correct supertag with much higher accuracy. In the context class model, supertags that share the same character-istics are grouped into classes and these classes, rather than individual supertags, are predicted by a trigram model. This is reminiscent of Samuelsson and Reich (1999) where some part of speech tags have been compounded so that each word is deterministically in one class. 
The grouping procedure may be described as follows. Recall that each supertag corresponds to a lexicalized tree t E G, where G is a particu-lar LTAG. Using standard FIRST and FOLLOW techniques, we may associate t with FOLLOW and PRECEDE sets, FOLLOW(t) being the set of supertags that can immediately follow t and PRECEDE(t) being those supertags that can im- mediately precede t. For example, an NP tree such as 81 would be in the FOLLOW set of a supertag of a verb that subcategorizes for an NP comple- ment. We partition the set of all supertags into classes such that all of the supertags in a particu- lar class are associated with lexicalized trees with the same PRECEDE and FOLLOW sets. For in- stance, the supertags tx and t2 corresponding re- spectively to the NP and S subcategorizations of a verb ]eared would be associated with the same class. (Note that a head NP tree would be a mem- ber of both FOLLOW(t1) and FOLLOW(t2).) 
The context class model predicts sets of su-pertags for words as follows. First, the trigram model supertags each word wi with supertag ti that belongs to class Ci.6 Furthermore, using the training corpus, we obtain set D~ which contains all supertags t such that ~(wilt) > 0. The word wi is relabeled with the set of supertags C~ N Di. 
The context class model trades off an increased ambiguity of 1.65 supertags per word on average, for a higher 92.51% accuracy. For the purpose of comparison, we may compare this model against a baseline model that partitions the set of all su- pertags into classes so that all of the supertags in one class share the same preterminal symbol, i.e., they are anchored by words which share the same part of speech. With classes defined in this man-ner, call C~ the set of supertags that belong to the class which is associated with word w~ in the test corpus. We may then associate with word w~ the set of supertags C~ gl Di, where Di is defined as above. This baseline procedure yields an aver- 
6For  class  models,  we  have  also  exper- 
imented  with  a  variant  Where  the  classes  
are  assigned  to  words  through  the  model  

c ~ aTgmaxcl-I~=,~(w, IC~)~(C, IC~_lC,_2). In 
general, we have found this procedure to give slightly worse results. 
age ambiguity of 5.64 supertags per word with an 980" 
accuracy of 97.96%. 


4.2 Confusion Class Model 
The confusion class model partitions supertags into classes according to an alternate procedure. Here, classes are derived from a confusion matrix analysis of errors which the trigram model makes while supertagging. First, the trigram model su-pertags a tune set. A confusion matrix is con-structed, recording the number of times supertag t~ was confused for supertag tj, or vice versa, in the tune set. Based on the top k pairs of supertags that are most confused, we construct classes of supertags that are confused with one another. For example, let tl and t2 be two PP supertags which modify an NP and VP respec-tively. The most common kind of mistake that the trigram model made on the tune data was to mistag tl as t2, and vice versa. Hence, tl and t2 are clustered by our method into the same con-fusion class. The second most common mistake was to confuse supertags that represent verb mod- ifier PPs and those that represent verb argument PPs, while the third most common mistake was to confuse supertags that represent head nouns and noun modifiers. These, too, would form their own classes. 
The confusion class model predicts sets of su- pertags for words in a manner similar to the con- text class model. Unlike the context class model, however, in this model we have to choose k, the number of pairs of supertags which are extracted from the confusion matrix over which confusion classes are formed. In our experiments, we have found that with k = 10, k = 20, and k = 40, the resulting models attain 94.61% accuracy and 
1.86 tags per word, 95.76% accurate and 2.23 tags per word, and 97.03% accurate and 3.38 tags per word, respectively/ 
Results of these, as well as other models dis- cussed below, are plotted in Figure 2. The n-best model is a modification of the trigram model in which the n most probable supertags per word are chosen. The classifier union result is obtained by assigning a word wi a set of supertags til,.+. ,tik where to tij is the jth classifier's supertag assign- ment for word wl, the classifiers being the models discussed in Section 3. It achieves an accuracy of 95.21% with 1.26 supertags per word. 
J 
0 Context
99 0" 
CMss 

96.0 " 
Confusion Class 
950 " 
Classffmr < Union 
94.0 " / -~(" N-Best 


93.0" 
920" 
S
910" I "P 3 
Ambiguity (Tags Per Word) 
Figure 2: Ambiguity versus Accuracy for Various Class Models 
5 Future Work 
We are considering extending our work in sev-eral directions. Srinivas (1997b) discussed a lightweight dependency analyzer which assigns de- pendencies assuming that each word has been as- signed a unique supertag. We are extending this algorithm to work with class based models which narrows down the number of supertags per word with much higher accuracy. Aside from the n-gram modeling that was a focus of this paper, we would also like to explore using other kinds of models, such as maximum entropy. 



6 Conclusions 
We have introduced two different kinds of models for the task of supertagging. Contextual mod-els show that features for accurate supertagging only produce improvements when they are appro- priately combined. Among these models were: a one pass head model that reduces propagation of head detection errors of previous models by using supertags themselves to identify heads; a mixed model that combines use of local and long distance information; and a classifier combination model that ameliorates the sparse data problem that is worsened by the introduction of many new fea-tures. These models achieve better supertagging accuracies than previously obtained. We have also introduced class based models which trade a slight increase in ambiguity for significantly higher accu- racy. Different class based methods are discussed, and the tradeoff between accuracy and ambiguity is demonstrated. 

7Again, for the class C assign to a given word w~,  References  
we consider only those tags ti E C for which/5(wdti) >  
0.  Steven Abney.  1990.  Rapid Incremental parsing  

with repair. In Proceedings of the 6th New OED Conference: Electronic Text Research, pages 1- 9, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. 

Hiyan Alshawi. 1996. Head automata and bilin- gual tiling: translation with minimal represen- tations. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting Association for Computational Lin-guistics, Santa Cruz, California. 
Srinivas Bangalore. 1998. Transplanting Su-pertags from English to Spanish. In Proceedings of the TAG+4 Workshop, Philadelphia, USA. 
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Peter V. deSouza, Jennifer Lai, and Robert L. Mercer. 1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural language Computational Linguistics, 18.4:467-
479. 

R. Chandrasekhar and B. Srinivas. 1997. Using supertags in document filtering: the effect of increased context on information retrieval In Proceedings of Recent Advances in NLP '97. 
Eugene Charniak. 1996. Tree-bank Grammars. Technical Report CS-96-02, Brown University, Providence, RI. 
Michael Collins. 1996. A New Statistical Parser Based on Bigram Lexical Dependencies. In Pro-ceedings of the 3~ th Annual Meeting of the As- sociation for Computational Linguistics, Santa Cruz. 
Roger Evans and David Weir. 1998. A Structure- sharing Parser for Lexicalized Grammars. In Proceedings of the 17 eh International Confer-ence on Computational Linguistics and the 36 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu- tational Linguistics, Montreal. 
Ralph Grishman. 1995. Where's the Syntax? The New York University MUC-6 System. In Proceedings of the Sixth Message Understand-ing Conference, Columbia, Maryland. 
H. 	van Halteren, J. Zavrel, and W. Daelmans. 1998. Improving Data Driven Wordctass Tag- ging by System Combination. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL 98, Montreal. 
Jerry R. Hobbs, Douglas E. Appelt, John Bear, David Israel, Andy Kehler, Megumi Ka- mayama, David Martin, Karen Myers, and Marby Tyson. 1995. SRI International FAS-TUS system MUC-6 test results and analy-sis. In Proceedings of the Sixth Message Un-derstanding Conference, Columbia, Maryland. 
Jerry R. Hobbs, Douglas Appelt, John Bear, David Israel, Megumi Kameyama, Mark Stickel, and Mabry Tyson. 1997. FASTUS: A Cas- caded Finite-State Transducer for Extracting Information from Natural-Language Text. In 
E. Roche and Schabes Y., editors, Finite State Devices for Natural Language Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Aravind K. Joshi and B. Srinivas. 1994. Dis-ambiguation of Super Parts of Speech (or Su- pertags): Almost Parsing. In Proceedings of the 17 th International Conference on Com-putational Linguistics (COLING '9~), Kyoto, Japan, August. 
D. Jurafsky, Chuck Wooters, Jonathan Segal, An- dreas Stolcke, Eric Fosler, Gary Tajchman, and Nelson Morgan. 1995. Using a Stochastic CFG as a Language Model for Speech Recognition. In Proceedings, IEEE ICASSP, Detroit, Michi- gan. 
David M. Magerman. 1995. Statistical Decision- Tree Models for Parsing. In Proceedings of the 33 ~d Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
T.R. 	
Niesler and P.C. Woodland. 1996. A variable-length category-based N-gram lan-guage model. In Proceedings, IEEE ICASSP. 

S. 
Roukos. 1996. Phrase structure language mod- els. In Proc. ICSLP '96, volume supplement, Philadelphia, PA, October. 


Christer Samuelsson and Wolfgang Reich. 1999. A Class-based Language Model for Large Vo- cabulary Speech Recognition Extracted from Part-of-Speech Statistics. In Proceedings, IEEE ICASSP. 
Yves Schabes. 1990. Mathematical and Computa- tional Aspects of Lexicalized Grammars. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel-phia, PA. 
B. Srinivas. 	1997a. Complexity of Lexical De- scriptions and its Relevance to Partial Pars- ing. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, August. 
B. Srinivas. 	1997b. Performance Evaluation of Supertagging for Partial Parsing. In Proceed-ings of Fifth International Workshop on Pars- ing Technology, Boston, USA, September. 
R. 	Weischedel., R. Schwartz, J. Palmucci, M. Meteer, and L. Ramshaw. 1993. Coping with ambiguity and unknown words through prob- abilistic models. Computational Linguistics, 19.2:359-382. 
The XTAG-Group. 1995. A Lexicalized Tree Ad- joining Grammar for English. Technical Re- port IRCS 95-03, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 





