An Algorithm for Aspects of Semantic Interpretation Using an
Enhanced WordNet
 
 
Fernando Gomez
 
 
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
 
 
gomezAcs.ucf.edu
 
 
Abstract 
 
An algorithm for semantic interpretation is ex-
plained. The algorithm is based on predicates
defined for WordNet verb classes. The algo-
rithm is driven by the definition of these pred-
icates whose thematic roles are linked to the
WordNet ontology for nouns and to the syn-
tactic relations that realize them. The algo-
rithm has been tested in the identification of
the meaning of the verb, thematic roles, and
temporal and spatial adjuncts.
 
 
1 Introduction
 
 
The semantic interpretation algorithm ex-
plained in this paper offers a solution to the
following interpretation problems: determina-
tion of the meaning of the verb, identification
of thematic roles and adjuncts, and attachments
of prepositional phrases (PPs). An interesting
aspect of the algorithm is that the solution of
all these problems is interdependent. The inter-
pretation algorithm uses WordNet (Miller et al.,
1993) as its lexical knowledge-base. Predicates,
or verbal concepts, have been defined for Word-
Net verb classes, which have been reorganized
considerably following the criteria imposed by
the interpretation algorithm. WordNet ontol-
ogy for nouns has also undergone some reorga-
nization and redefinition to conform with the
entries in the thematic roles of the predicates.
One of the views that guides this research is that
the syntax of many verbs is determined by their
meaning. Some verbs that are highly ambigu-
ous, say more than 10 senses, and light verbs,
which do not lexicalize anything, will need spe-
cial definitions.
Briefly, the algorithm is as follows. For every
verb in a sentence, WordNet provides a list of
verb synsets for which we have defined predi-
cates. These predicates can be viewed as con-
tenders for the meaning of the verb. As syntac-
tic relations are parsed, the interpreter checks
each predicate in order to see if the predicate
has a thematic role which is realized by the syn-
tactic relation. If so, the interpreter records this
fact and gets the next syntactic relation. The
predicate that realizes the most syntactic rela-
tions in the sentence is selected as the meaning
of the verb.
This paper is organized as follows. The first
part of the paper - sections 2 to 5 - explains the
methodology for building predicates for Word-
Net verb classes, and the second part - sections
6 to 9 - describes the semantic interpretation
algorithm, testing and conclusions.
 
 
2 Defining Predicates for WordNet
Verb Classes
 
 
One of the problems of linking WordNet verb
classes (Fellbaum, 1993) to the semantic in-
terpretation process is that WordNet does not
present a classification of verbs based on seman-
tic decomposition, but rather one based on rela-
tional semantic analysis, in which lexical items
are taken as irreducible meaning units. Al-
though a full semantic decomposition of verbs
(Jackendoff, 1990; Talmy, 1985; Dowty, 1979),
much less one that reduces verbs to a small set
of primitives (Schank, 1975), is not very rele-
vant to semantic interpretation, some abstract
semantic predicates are needed to anchor classes
of verbs and their subclasses. These abstract se-
mantic predicates and their more specific sub-
predicates contain the selectional restrictions
and syntactic relations for the thematic roles
defining them. The entries in the predicates
will be used by the semantic interpreter to at-
tach modifiers and to link syntactic relations to
semantic ones. Although WordNet does not ex-
plicitly recognize conceptual components, these
are implicitly present in the relations linking
subordinate verbs to superordinate verbs. The
main relation linking a subordinate verb to its
superordinate, is that of troponymy (Fellbaum,
1993), meaning that to V/ is to 17,2 in some
particular manner, where manner covers a di-
verse class of semantic relations, including the
intention of the agent of the action, the way
in which the action is carried out, the instru-
ment, etc. Thus, we have taken a top-down
approach that defines generic abstract predi-
cates subsuming semantically and syntactically
a large class of verbs. WordNet verb classes
have been mapped into these generic predicates.
Some of this mapping has required us to de-
fine new classes and to reclassify and/or rede-
fine some WordNet classes and subclasses. Two
major consequences derive from anchoring verb
classes in abstract semantic predicates: coalesc-
ing many WordNet senses into a predicate, and
mapping the same WordNet synset into distinct
predicates. For instance, all the 5 synsets listed
by WordNet for &amp;quot;travel&amp;quot;: &amp;quot;trave11, go, move,
locomote;&amp;quot; &amp;quot;trave12, journey;&amp;quot; &amp;quot;trave13, take
a trip, make a trip;&amp;quot; &amp;quot;trave14, journey;&amp;quot; and
&amp;quot;travel5 (undergo transportation, as in a vehi-
cle)&amp;quot; can be coalesced into the abstract semantic
predicate change-of-location-by-animate. This
predicate defines a class of verbs containing the
most generic properties shared by all members
of the class. The differentia between this pred-
icate and its subpredicates are given by one or
more of the following: a) specific selectional
restrictions for the thematic roles, b) different
syntactic realizations of the thematic roles, and
c) specific sets of inferences associated with the
subpredicates. For instance, the instrument of
the predicate drive-a-vehicle, not to be confused
with the verb &amp;quot;drive,&amp;quot; is always a vehicle, while
the instrument of change-of-location-by-animate
can be an animate, an animate body part, etc.
The instrument of drive-a-vehicle is never re-
alized by a subject, while the instrument of
the generic predicate can be realized by a sub-
ject, e.g., &amp;quot;This bus goes to Cambridge every
Wednesday.&amp;quot; Note that in the sentence &amp;quot;This
car/bus drives well&amp;quot; the meaning of &amp;quot;drive&amp;quot; is
not change-of-location-by-animate.
On the other hand, migrate differs from
change-of-location-by-animate only by the spe-
cific inferences associated with this predicate.
The inferences derived from &amp;quot;Three hundred
Irishmen migrated to Boston last year&amp;quot; would
be very different had the main verb been &amp;quot;trav-
eled,&amp;quot; yet there are no differences between the
selectional restrictions and syntactic realiza-
tions for the predicates migrate and travel. Sub-
predicates inherit all the thematic roles not
listed in their definitions from their parent pred-
icates. The number and nature of the thematic
roles depend on the generic predicates and sub-
predicates, and not on some general criteria re-
gardless of each predicate (Fillmore, 1968). See
(Gomez, 1998) for a discussion.
 
 
3 The syntax of roles
 
 
The syntax of roles in the predicates that will
be defined below is given by the following gram-
mar:
 
 
S -&gt; (ROLE L); ROLE -&gt; agentIthemel..
L -&gt; (SM) (SR) LI (SM) (SR)
SM -&gt; ONTOLOGICAL-CAT SMIONTOLOGICAL-CAT
SM -&gt; -ONTOLOGICAL-CAT SMI-ONTOLOGICAL-CAT
SR -&gt; SYNTACTIC-REL SRISYNTACTIC-REL
SYNTACTIC-REL -&gt; (prep PREP)IsubjI
IobjIobj2Isubj-if-objIsubj-if-no-objI
Iobj-if-obj2Ipredicate-complementI
Icomplement-phraseIadjective-phrase
PREP -&gt; ANY-PREP PREPI ANY-PREP
ONTOLOGICAL-CAT -&gt;thingIphysical-thingI...
ANY-PREP -&gt; onlinl....
 
 
Each thematic role is followed by any number
of list pairs. The first list contains the selec-
tional restrictions, a subset of the ontological
categories in WordNet, in order of preference
(Wilks, 1975) for the thematic role, and the sec-
ond list contains the syntactic relations (hence-
forth, SRs) that may realize the thematic role.
For any given sentence, only one of the SRs in
the list realizes the role. An ontological cate-
gory preceded by the sign &amp;quot;-&amp;quot; in a selectional
restriction means that the thematic role is not
realized by that ontological category. The entry
obj refers to the first postverbal NP, obj2 to the
second postverbal NP. Subj-if-obj refers to the
subject of a sentence that also has an object
(the verb is used transitively), and subj-if-no-
obj refers to the subject of a sentence containing
no object (the verb is used intransitively). Obj-
if-obj2 refers to the obj of a sentence having also
an obj2 (the verb is used ditransitively). Thus,
 
 
[communicate
(is-a (interact))
(wn-map (communicate2) (transfer2))
(agent (human-agent animal ) (subj))
(theme ( abstraction) (cp obj obj2)
(thing) ((prep about of))
(abstraction) ((prep on)))
(recipient (human-agent animal) (obj
obj-if-obj2 (prep to)))
(medium-of-expression
(written-communication)(subj (prep in)))
 
 
The wn-map entry means that all the WordNet
verb forms under &amp;quot;communicate2&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;trans-
fer2&amp;quot; are in principle coalesced into the predi-
cate communicate. These two synsets include
over 2000 verb forms. The synset transfer2
in WordNet is a subclass of move, displace4,
which includes physical things as the things be-
ing transferred or moved. However, our predi-
cate communicate and its subpredicates encom-
pass the transfer of information, thoughts and
abstractions in general by an animate being
to another, excluding the transfer of physical
things. Subpredicates of the predicate commu-
nicate will be defined as explained below. But,
if they were not defined, then any form that
is mapped by WordNet into any of these two
synsets would be mapped into the predicate
communicate. Of course, if the form is also
mapped by WordNet into another synset be-
sides any of the senses of &amp;quot;communicate2,&amp;quot; or
&amp;quot;transfer2&amp;quot; then it will be mapped into what-
ever predicate we identify for that synset.
The entry agent indicates that the agents
of communicate are entities belonging to the
classes animal or human-agent (a human, or a
social-group). It also indicates that the agent
is realized syntactically by the subject of the
sentence. The theme role contains three pairs
of lists. The first pair expresses this role when
it is syntactically realized by a cp (complement
phrase), obj (first postverbal NP) or obj2 (sec-
ond postverbal NP). The selectional restrictions
for theme when it is syntactically realized by cp,
obj or obj2 is abstraction.
The second pair of lists indicate that the
theme may also be syntactically realized by the
prepositions &amp;quot;of&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;about,&amp;quot; and the selec-
tional restriction is &amp;quot;thing,&amp;quot; which includes ev-
ery entity in the ontology. Lastly, the final
pair indicates that the theme can be realized
by the preposition &amp;quot;on,&amp;quot; and the selectional re-
striction is abstraction. The sign &amp;quot;-&amp;quot; preceding
a selectional restriction means that any noun
sense that is subsumed by the semantic category
preceded by &amp;quot;-&amp;quot; does not realize that thematic
role. Thus, if one had written &amp;quot;-human-agent&amp;quot;
in the selectional restriction for the theme when
it is syntactically realized by obj, the inter-
preter would not have taken &amp;quot;President,&amp;quot; or
&amp;quot;Congress&amp;quot; as the theme in &amp;quot;He briefed the
] President/Congress.&amp;quot; Of course, in this case
this is unneeded because human-agent is not
an abstraction in the ontology. The recipi-
ent role is syntactically realized by obj, (e.g.,
&amp;quot;He informed the President&amp;quot;), by obj-if-obj2,
(e.g., &amp;quot;She told the judge the truth.&amp;quot;), and the
preposition &amp;quot;to,&amp;quot; (e.g., &amp;quot;She told the truth to
the judge.&amp;quot;), and the selectional restrictions are
human-agent and animal. The role medium-of-
expression indicates the medium used for the
transfer of information and is syntactically re-
alized by a subject (e.g., &amp;quot;The first book tells of
her youth and early studies,&amp;quot; or the preposion
&amp;quot;in&amp;quot; (e.g., &amp;quot;In her first book, she tells of young
women who react violently against a dehuman-
ized society.&amp;quot;)
Subpredicates of the predicate communicate
are defined. For instance, consider the WordNet
synset &amp;quot;teach1, learn, instruct&amp;quot; which has com-
municate2 as its superclass. This synset forms
a class in WN with over 40 entries. Below, it is
the hierarchy for the predicate teach and some
of its subpredicates, which are listed followed by
the corresponding synsets in WordNet.
 
 
teach (wn-map (teachl) ) ( s-a ( communi cat e ) )
* train (wn-map (trainl train2) )
* indoctrinate (wn-map ( indoctr inat e 1) )
* lecture (wn-map (le cture 1) )
* educate (wn-map ( educat e 1) )
 
 
Space limitation impedes us to list the defini-
tions for these predicates, but some of the dif-
subj refers to the subject of a sentence without
expressing any context about the transitivity or
intransitivity of the verb.
 
 
4 Verbs of Communication
 
 
In this section, we explain the predicate com-
municate so that the algorithm may be followed
by the reader. Other definitions of predicates
may be found in (Gomez, 1998).
ferences between teach and its superpredicate,
communicate are as follows. The definition for
the predicate teach is identical to that of com-
municate, except that the theme is not realized
by the preposition &amp;quot;of.&amp;quot; Its subpredicates train,
lecture, and educate do not realize syntactically
the theme with an obj, and so on. Educate1 is
not a subclass of teach in WordNet, but of pol-
ish, which in turn it is a subclass of better 2 and
this of change1. We have classified educate1 as
a subpredicate of teach because it shares more
thematic roles and inferences with this predicate
than with any other. The complete hierarchy
for communicate that we have defined includes
over 124 predicates.
 
 
5 Semi-Automatic Construction of
Predicates
 
 
As of this writing, we have defined over 1300
predicates and mapped 85% of WordNet verb
classes into predicates. The final product that
is coming out from this effort differs very con-
siderably from WordNet verb classes because
of the different criteria for predicate classes.
The definition of predicates has proceeded on
a top down manner, namely defining predicates
and subpredicates for WordNet classes and sub-
classes, respectively. This has required a con-
siderable amount of work, because of the need
to redefine and reorganize the WordNet verb
classes, and, to a lesser extent, the ontology
for nouns. For instance, the concept written-
communication, which has many subconcepts,
is categorized in Wordnet only as an abstrac-
tion. Thus, the interpreter failed to interpret
such simple sentences as &amp;quot;She burned the let-
ter/She put the letter on the table,&amp;quot; because
&amp;quot;letter&amp;quot; does not have physical-thing as one of
its hypernyms (superconcepts). The changes to
the ontology of nouns took much of our intial
effort because many of interpreter failures were
due to the noun ontology. We are finishing a
report that describes these changes, which have
resulted into a noun ontology whose content and
structure have been determined by the seman-
tic interpretation algorithm, rather than by our
intuitions about how to categorize ontologically
a concept.
But, now that most predicate classes have
been defined and that the reorganization and
structure of the ontology for nouns is close to
completion, there is considerable room for the
semi-automatic construction of predicates for
those individual verbs that, because of their
high polysemy, require predicate definitions tai-
lored to them. For our developing purposes, we
have used an electronic version of the The World
Book Encyclopedia (World Book, Ic., Chicago,
1987). We have partioned the articles into sub-
ject classes. We have grouped all articles that
deal with biographies, all those about animals,
about countries, diseases, etc. Each class forms
a corpus in which the verb senses and the noun
ontology exhibit certain common features. Di-
verse functions skim the articles extracting all
sentences in which a verb (or any word) is used.
The sentence is passed to the parser and, then,
to the semantic interpreter for interpretation.
When a failure in interpretation occurs be-
cause of one of the following reasons: a) the
sense of the verb was not correctly identified,
b) no meaning was assigned to a syntactic re-
lation, or c) a thematic role or an adjunct was
incorrectly identified, several functions are acti-
vated. These functions skim the classes of ar-
ticles searching for sentences which share some
syntactic and semantic properties with the ones
that the interpeter fails to interpret. Thus, if
the interpreter fails to identify some thematic
roles in a sentence, the syntactic similarity al-
gorithm selects all those sentences containing
the syntactic relations that realize the unidenti-
fied thematic roles. Then, the algorithm chooses
from those sentences those in which the ontolog-
ical category of the head nouns of the syntactic
relations are semantically similar as defined by
Resnik (Resnik, 1999). Then, the user selects
from these ontological categories the selectional
restrictions for the thematic roles of the pred-
icate being defined. In many cases, the onto-
logical categories proposed by the acquisition
algorithm are the exact ones, requiring little in-
tervention on the part of the user.
 
 
6 Interpretation Algorithm
 
 
The semantic interpretation algorithm is acti-
vated by the parser after parsing a clause. Thus,
interpretation does not start until the end of
the clause is reached. The interpreter requires
from the parser an identification of the NP com-
plements and PPs of the clause, or sentence.
Our parser recognizes clausal and NP comple-
ments, relative clauses, resolves gaps resulting
from questions and relativization, and handles
coordination and subordination. It does not
resolve structural ambiguity, which is the sole
task of the interpreter. Our mapping of Word-
Net verb synsets to predicates provides a list
containing the predicates for the verb of the
clause. The goals of the algorithm are to se-
lect one predicate from that list, attach PPs
and identify thematic roles. All these tasks are
simultaneously achieved. For each syntactic re-
lation in the clause (starting with the NP com-
plements) and for every predicate in the list of
predicates, the algorithm checks if the predicate
explains the SR (syntactic relation). A predi-
cate explains an SR if there is a thematic role in
the predicate realized by the SR and the selec-
tional restrictions of the thematic role subsume
the ontological category of the head noun of the
syntactic relation. This process is repeated for
each SR in the clause and each predicate in the
list of predicates. Then, the predicate that ex-
plains the most SRs is selected as the meaning
of the verb. The thematic roles of the predicate
have been identified as result of this process. In
case of ties, the predicate that has the greater
number of thematic roles realized is selected.
The algorithm in greater detail is as follows.
Step I. Get the definitions of the predicates
which the verb of the clause may stand for. Put
those predicates in the list VC-L. (Our mapping
of WordNet synsets to predicates produces that
list.)
Step II. Check which thematic roles in ev-
ery VC in VC-L are realized by the NP comple-
ments of the clause, starting with the subject:
1. Match Subj (pre-verbal NP) Let HN-OF-
SUBJ be the head noun of the subject of the
clause.
1.1 For every VC in VC-L, initialize the list
Matches to nil. Match the subj selectional re-
strictions in VC against the senses of HN-OF-
SUBJ. Store the result in the list Matches. Save
Matches under VC. End For. (The match algo-
rithm is explained below.)
1.2 If the clause has an object, For every VC
in VC-L initialize the list Matches to nil. Match
the subj-if-obj selectional restrictions in the VC
against the senses of HN-OF-SUBJ. Store the
result in Matches. Save Matches under VC. End
For.
1.3 Else If the clause has no object, For every
VC in VC-L initialize the list Matches to nil.
Match the subj-if-no-obj selectional restrictions
in the VC against the senses of HN-OF-SUBJ.
Store the result in Matches. Save Matches un-
der VC. End For.
2. Match obj and obj2 (post-verbal NPs).
Let HN-OF-OBJ be the head noun of the obj in
the clause. Let HN-OF-OBJ2 be the head noun
of obj 2 in the clause.
2.1 If the clause has an obj, then
2.1.1 For each verbal concept VC in VC-L,
initialize Matches to nil. Match the obj-if-obj2
selectional restrictions in VC against the senses
of HN-OF-OBJ. Store the results in Matches.
Save Matches under VC. End For.
2.1.2 For each verbal concept VC in VC-L,
initialize Matches to nil. Match the obj 2 selec-
tional restrictions in VC-L against the senses of
HN-OF-OBJ2. Save Matches under VC. End
For.
2.2 Else if the clause has no obj, For each
verbal concept VC in VC-L, initialize Matches
to nil. Match the obj selectional restrictions
in VC against the senses of HN-OF-OBJ. Save
Matches under VC. End For.
Step III. Match post-verbal PPs. For every
VC in VC-L do For every PP starting with the
one placed immediately after the verb (left to
right) do: If the preposition of the PP is listed
in the representation of VC and the selectional
restrictions in the VC for that preposition match
the senses of the head noun of the PP, then save
this result under VC. End For. End For. A
match of a PP results in identifying the thematic
role for that VC.
 
 
The Match Algorithm
 
 
The algorithm match that matches the se-
mantic categories in the selectional restrictions
against the senses of a noun is given below.
The algorithm consists of an outer loop and two
unnested inner loops. The inner loops iterate in
each noun sense. One of the inner loops handles
the exclusionary semantic categories (those pre-
ceded by &amp;quot;-&amp;quot;) and another the confirmatory ones
(not preceded by &amp;quot;-&amp;quot;). The outer loop iterates in
the selectional restrictions in the thematic roles
until a confirmatory category subsumes a noun
sense, or the list of selectional restrictions is ex-
hausted. Let SLR (selectional restrictions) for
a thematic role be = slri, slr2, ...srlr, and HP,
(the senses of a noun after being mapped into
the core ontology) be = hp&apos;, hp2...hp,„. Each
hp, has the form (ontological-category noun/
noun2 nouni). The first element in hp, is
the ontological category.
 
 
Set match-sir = nil.
Loopl: For each r in SLR do
If r is an exclusionary semantic category
then
For each hp in HP do
If r subsumes the first element in hp
then delete hp from HP
End for
If r is a confirmatory semantic category
then For each hp in HP do
If r subsumes the first element in hp
then begin
Save the match;
Set match-sir = t;
end
End for
If match-sir is t then exit Loopl
End Loopl
 
 
Step IV. After running the algorithm, the
VCs are ranked placing first the one that ex-
plains the most syntactic relations in the sen-
tence and last the one that explains the least
number of syntactic relations. If several VCs are
tied, then they ranked by placing first the VC
that has the greater number of thematic roles
realized by the clause and last the one that has
the least number. If, after this filter, there are
still VCs that are tied, the algorithm selects the
VC that corresponds to the most frequent verb
sense as defined by WordNet. Although two
VCs may explain the same number of syntactic
relations, one of them may have more thematic
roles realized. This is due to the fact that the
same syntactic relation may realize more than a
thematic role. For instance, the subject of verbs
that express a change of location by an animate
being may realize both the theme and the agent.
Thus, in the sentence &amp;quot;Peter ran today&amp;quot; several
VCs are going to explain all the syntactic re-
lations (e.g., run-a-firm, operate-a-machine, ..),
but moving-by-running will have more thematic
roles realized because the subject realizes the
agent and theme. Hence, moving-by-runing is
preferred over the other VCs which have not re-
alized their themes.
Step V. Determine adjuncts. Every syntac-
tic relation that has not been mapped to a the-
matic role must be an adjunct or an NP modi-
fier. The entries for adjuncts are stored in the
root node action and are inherited by all VCs.
Adjuncts are identified after the meaning of the
verb has been determined because adjuncts are
not part of the argument structure of the predi-
cate. Thus, in &amp;quot;Peter eats every day at school,&amp;quot;
the meaning of &amp;quot;every day&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;at school&amp;quot; are
identified after the predicate has been deter-
mined. Prepositions that are listed in the action
node as weakly claimed by the verb may modify
the verb or a NP. Heuristic rules decide in those
cases. Note that even if the parser recognizes
&amp;quot;every day&amp;quot; as an object, not as a time NP, the
algorithm will not take &amp;quot;every day&amp;quot; as a theme
of the predicate because time will not match the
selectional restrictions of ingest. However, the
interpreter will still recognize &amp;quot;every day&amp;quot; as a
temporal adjunct, because the entry for tempo-
ral adjunct in the node action says that it can
be realized by a time-np or an obj. The entry
obj is there just in case that the parser makes a
mistake.
 
 
7 Testing
 
 
In the last two years, we have conducted di-
verse tests and the system has been demoed
in a major conference. We plan to demo it
in this conference, which is perhaps the best
test we can offer. Some of the tests have
evaluated the performance of the algorithm in
identifying subpredicates of major predicates
such as change-of-location-by-animate with over
1200 verb forms in Wordnet, cause-change-of-
location with over 1600 verb forms, transfer-
of-possession with over 1500 forms, transfer-of-
information with over 1000 forms, and judge
with 600 forms and others.
Recently, we performed a bottom-up evalua-
tion. We selected 30 verbs randomly from the
set of 165 verbs having more than 10 senses in
Wordnet. These were the verbs selected: ac-
cept break bring carry catch charge come deliver
dress fall feel fly grow hold lead leave meet pass
pick present ride run serve strike suffer take
throw turn walk work.
Some of these verbs actually have more than
40 senses. We tested the performance of the
algorithm in identifying the predicate (meaning
 
 
Table 1: Test Results
 
 
Test1 Test2 Test3
Predicate 96% 95% 91%
PP Attachment 96% 96% NA
Thematic-Roles 95% 95% NA
Adjuncts 97% 97% NA
 
 
of the verb), the attachment of PPs, thematic
roles and adjuncts. For our testing corpus, we
used an electronic encyclopedia. For each verb
tested a program selected ten sentences. This
produced 300 sentences - 10 for each verb.
A problem with this test, test1, is that it does
not test all predicates for each of the verbs se-
lected. The reason is that the sentences ran-
domly selected by the testing program may have
the same predicates. Selecting one or two sen-
tences per predicate is not a good evaluation
procedure either because the interpreter may
identify predicate p in sentence .5/, but it may
fail to identify p in sentence sa Moreover, it
may identify p in s2, but it may fail to iden-
tify its thematic roles, adjuncts, etc. Then, we
conducted test2 in which other 300 sentences
were randomly selected but the selection pro-
gram discarded those sentences with a predicate
already tested in testi. The results were very
similar to testi. Yet, some of the less frequent
predicates for some of the verbs were not se-
lected by this procedure either. The results of
both tests are in Table 2.
Metaphoric uses of the verb were a cause of
failure. The failure for thematic roles and PP
attachment were mainly due to missing preposi-
tions in the thematic role entry of the predicate
and overgeneralizing the definition of a subpred-
icate. That is, stating that the subpredicate in-
herits all or most of its thematic roles from its
super-predicate when that is not the case.
Test3 is a very recent test that was conducted
on the 5000 words that were sense tagged for
SIGLEX99. We tested the system on determin-
ing the meaning of the verb. Thematic roles,
PP attachment and adjuncts are not provided in
the data. We excluded from the test the verbs:
&amp;quot;be,&amp;quot; &amp;quot;do,&amp;quot; &amp;quot;have.&amp;quot; We selected the verbs that
occurred 3 or more times in the text. The worse
performance of the system on this text is ex-
plained by the fact that some of the senses in
some of the verbs (&amp;quot;make,&amp;quot; &amp;quot;go,&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;come&amp;quot;
especially) have not yet been covered.
 
 
8 Related Research
 
 
Besides the obvious influence of WordNet, this
work is very much related to Palmer&apos;s VerbNet
project (Dang et al., 1998), and has benefited
from (Levin, 1993) and (Pritchett, 1992). The
lexical view expressed in this paper that the syn-
tax of many verbs is determined by their mean-
ing have been also presented by (Pinker, 1989;
Grimshaw, 1990; Levin, 1993) and others. A
stronger point for which we offer some evidence
in this paper, is that, if the above view is cor-
rect, then the generic predicates drive the se-
mantic interpretation process which will need
only a minimal syntactic analysis as that ex-
pressed by D-theory (Marcus et al., 1983) and
minimal commitment model parsers (Weinberg,
1993; Correll, 1991). The other guiding princi-
ple of this research is that the meaning of the
verb depends not only on its selectional restric-
tions, but also on the syntactic relations that re-
alize them. A similar view has been presented in
(Pustejovsky, 1995). The lexical aspect of this
research is also related to the FrameNet project
(Baker et al., 1998), which is producing frame-
semantic descriptions for English lexical items.
Hirst (Hirst, 1992) also used an eliminative
approach to resolve verb meaning and thematic
roles simultaneously. The algorithm has also
some similarities to the one reported in (Gomez
et al., 1997), but there are major differences.
For instance, the algorithm in (Gomez et al.,
1997) relies on what the authors call VM-rules
to determine the meaning of the verb. These
rules, which are stored in the verb forms and
are order sensitive, are tried as the parser parses
syntactic relations. If one of the VM-rules fires,
determining the meaning of the verb, then the
thematic relations and attachment of preposi-
tions are resolved by accessing the predicate def-
inition. However in the present algorithm, the
meaning of the verb and thematic relations are
synergistically determined by the scoring algo-
rithm. This makes unnecessary the VM-rules
and grounds the algorithm solely on the declar-
ative representations of the predicates, whose
selectional restrictions are based on a general
ontology of English, namely WordNet.
 
 
9 Conclusions
 
 
We have presented an algorithm for the seman-
tic interpretation of unrestricted domains. The
algorithm is based on the WordNet general on-
tology for nouns and on a definition of predi-
cates which have been linked to the noun on-
tology and organized in a hierarchy in which
subpredicates inherit thematic roles from its su-
perpredicates. The algorithm, which has been
implemented in Common Lisp and is running
on Sparc 5 workstations, has been tested in its
ability to attach PPs, identify thematic roles
and adjuncts.
 
 
Acknowledgements
 
 
I thank Christiane Fellbaum for encouraging
this work, and Carlos Segami for implementing
most aspects of the algorithm.

References

C. F. Baker, C. J. Fillmore, and J.B. Lowe.
1998. The berkeley framenet project. In
Proc. of COLING-ACL-98, pages 79-85,
Montreal, Quebec.
loan Trang Dang, Karin Kipper, Martha
Palmer, and Joseph Rosenzweig. 1998. Inves-
tigating regular sense extensions based on in-
tersective levin classes. In In COLING-ACL,
pages 293-299, Montreal, Quebec.
D. R. Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Mon-
tague Grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel, Dor-
drecht.
C. Fellbaum. 1993. English verbs as a semantic
net. Technical report, Princeton. CSL Re-
port 43, revised March 1993.
C. J. Fillmore. 1968. The case for case. In
E. Bach and R.T. Harms, editors, Universals
in Linguistic Theory, pages 1-88. Holt, Rine-
hart and Winston, New York, NY.
F. Gomez, C. Segami, and R. Hull. 1997. De-
termining prepositional attachment, preposi-
tional meaning, verb meaning and thematic
roles. Computational Intelligence, 13(1):1-
31.
F. Gomez. 1998. Linking wordnet verb classes
to semantic interpretation. In COLING-ACL
Workshop on Usage of WordNet in NLP Sys-
tems, pages 58-64, U. de Montreal.
P. Correll. 1991. Subcategorization and sen-
tence processing. In R.C. Berwick and S.P.
Abneyand C. Tenny, editors, Principle-Based
Parsing: Computation and Psycholinguistics.
Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands.
J. Crimshaw. 1990. Argument Structure. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
C. Hirst. 1992. Semantic interpretation and the
resolution of ambiguity. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York.
R. Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structures. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
B. Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
M .D. Marcus, D. Hindle, and M. Fleck. 1983.
D-theory: Talking about talking about trees.
In Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the ACL.
C. A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum,
D. Cross, and K. Miller. 1993. Introduc-
tion to WordNet: An on-line lexical database.
Technical report, Princeton. CSL Report 43,
revised March 1993.
S. Pinker. 1989. Learnability and Cognition.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
B. L. Pritchett. 1992. Grammatical Compe-
tence and Parsing Performance. The Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago,Illinois.
J. Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
P. Resnik. 1999. Semantic similarity in a tax-
onomy: An information-based measure and
its application to problems of ambiguity in
natural language. Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence Research, 11:95-130.
R. Schank. 1975. Conceptual Information Pro-
cessing. North Holland, Amsterdam.
L. Talmy. 1985. Lexicalization patterns:
semantic structure in lexical forms. In
T Shopen, editor, Language typology and syn-
tactic description. Vol.3:Grammatical cate-
gories and the lexicon. Cambridge University
Press.
A. Weinberg. 1993. Parameters in the theory
of sentence processing: Minimal commitment
theory goes east. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 22(3) :339-364.
Y. A. Wilks. 1975. Preference semantics.
In E.L. Keenan, editor, Formal Semantics
of Natural Language. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.