Closing the Gap: Learning-Based Information Extraction Rivaling
Knowledge-Engineering Methods



Hai Leong Chieu
DSO National Laboratories
20 Science Park Drive 
Singapore 118230 
chaileon@dso.org.sg


Hwee Tou Ng Department of 
Computer Science National 
University of Singapore
3 Science Drive 
2
Singapore 
117543
nght@comp.nus.edu.s
g


Yoong Keok Lee
DSO National Laboratories
20 Science Park Drive 
Singapore 118230 
lyoongke@dso.org.sg






Abstract

In this paper, we present a learning ap- 
proach to the scenario template task of 
information extraction, where information 
filling one template could come from mul- 
tiple sentences. When tested on the MUC-
4  task,  our  learning approach achieves
accuracy competitive to the best of the 
MUC-4 systems, which were all built with 
manually engineered rules.   Our analy- 
sis reveals that our use of  full parsing 
and state-of-the-art learning algorithms 
have contributed to the good performance. 
To our knowledge, this is the first re- 
search to have demonstrated that a learn- 
ing approach to the full-scale informa- 
tion extraction task could achieve per- 
formance rivaling that of the knowledge- 
engineering approach.


1    Introduction

The explosive growth of online texts written in natu- 
ral language has prompted much research into infor- 
mation extraction (IE), the task of automatically ex- 
tracting specific information items of interest from 
natural language texts.  The extracted information 
is used to fill database records, also known as tem- 
plates in the IE literature.
  Research efforts on IE tackle a variety of tasks. 
They include extracting information from semi- 
structured texts, such as seminar announcements, 
rental and job advertisements, etc., as well as from 
free texts, such as newspaper articles (Soderland,
1999).  IE from semi-structured texts is easier than
from free texts, since the layout and format of a 
semi-structured text provide additional useful clues



AYACUCHO, 19 JAN 89 – TODAY TWO PEOPLE WERE 
WOUNDED WHEN A BOMB EXPLODED IN SAN JUAN 
BAUTISTA MUNICIPALITY. OFFICIALS SAID THAT 
SHINING PATH MEMBERS WERE RESPONSIBLE FOR 
THE ATTACK ...   ...   POLICE SOURCES STATED THAT 
THE BOMB ATTACK INVOLVING THE SHINING PATH 
CAUSED SERIOUS DAMAGES ... ...


Figure 1: Snippet of a MUC-4 document


to aid in extraction.  Several benchmark data sets 
have been used to evaluate IE approaches on semi- 
structured texts (Soderland, 1999; Ciravegna, 2001; 
Chieu and Ng, 2002a).
  For the task of extracting information from free 
texts, a series of Message Understanding Confer- 
ences (MUC) provided benchmark data sets for eval- 
uation. Several subtasks for IE from free texts have 
been identified. The named entity (NE) task extracts 
person names, organization names, location names, 
etc. The template element (TE) task extracts infor- 
mation centered around an entity, like the acronym, 
category, and location of a company. The template 
relation (TR) task extracts relations between enti- 
ties. Finally, the full-scale IE task, the scenario tem- 
plate (ST) task, deals with extracting generic infor- 
mation items from free texts. To tackle the full ST 
task, an IE system needs to merge information from 
multiple sentences in general, since the information 
needed to fill one template can come from multiple 
sentences, and thus discourse processing is needed. 
The full-scale ST task is considerably harder than all 
the other IE tasks or subtasks outlined above.
  As is the case with many other natural language 
processing (NLP) tasks, there are two main ap- 
proaches to IE, namely the knowledge-engineering 
approach and the learning approach.   Most early 
IE systems adopted the knowledge-engineering ap-


0    MESSAGE: ID                                        TST3-MUC4-0014
1    MESSAGE: TEMPLATE                        1
2    INCIDENT: DATE                                  19-JAN-89
3    INCIDENT: LOCATION	PERU: SAN JUAN BAUTISTA 
(MUNICIPALITY)
4    INCIDENT: TYPE                                  BOMBING
5    INCIDENT: STAGE OF EXECUTION  ACCOMPLISHED
6    INCIDENT: INSTRUMENT ID              “BOMB”
7    INCIDENT: INSTRUMENT TYPE        BOMB:“BOMB”
8    PERP: INCIDENT CATEGORY             TERRORIST ACT
9    PERP: INDIVIDUAL ID                        “SHINING PATH MEMBERS”
10  PERP: ORGANIZATION ID                  “SHINING PATH”
11  PERP: ORGANIZATION	SUSPECTED OR ACCUSED BY 
CONFIDENCE	AUTHORITIES:“SHINING PATH”
12  PHYS TGT: ID                                        -
13  PHYS TGT: TYPE                                  -
14  PHYS TGT: NUMBER                           -
15  PHYS TGT: FOREIGN NATION           -
16  PHYS TGT: EFFECT OF INCIDENT    SOME DAMAGE:“-”
17  PHYS TGT: TOTAL NUMBER              -
18  HUM TGT: NAME                                 -
19  HUM TGT: DESCRIPTION                   “PEOPLE”
20  HUM TGT: TYPE                                   CIVILIAN:“PEOPLE”
21  HUM TGT: NUMBER                            2:“PEOPLE”
22  HUM TGT: FOREIGN NATION            -
23  HUM TGT: EFFECT OF INCIDENT     INJURY:“PEOPLE”
24  HUM TGT: TOTAL NUMBER              -

Figure 2: Example of a MUC-4 template


proach, where manually engineered rules were used 
for IE. More recently, machine learning approaches 
have been used for IE from semi-structured texts 
(Califf and Mooney, 1999; Soderland, 1999; Roth 
and Yih, 2001;  Ciravegna, 2001;  Chieu and Ng,
2002a),  named entity extraction (Chieu  and Ng,
2002b), template element extraction, and template 
relation extraction (Miller et al., 1998). These ma- 
chine learning approaches have been successful for 
these tasks, achieving accuracy comparable to the 
knowledge-engineering approach.
  However, for the full-scale ST task of generic IE 
from free texts, the best reported method to date is 
still the knowledge-engineering approach.  For ex- 
ample, almost all participating IE systems in MUC 
used the knowledge-engineering approach for the 
full-scale ST task.   The one notable exception is 
the work of UMass at MUC-6 (Fisher et al., 1995). 
Unfortunately, their learning approach did consider- 
ably worse than the best MUC-6 systems.  Soder- 
land (1999) and Chieu and Ng (2002a) attempted 
machine learning approaches for a scaled-down ver- 
sion of the ST task, where it was assumed that the 
information needed to fill one template came from 
one sentence only.
  In  this paper,  we present a learning approach 
to the full-scale ST task of extracting information 
from free texts. The task we tackle is considerably 
more complex than that of (Soderland, 1999; Chieu



and Ng, 2002a), since we need to deal with merg- 
ing information from multiple sentences to fill one 
template.  We evaluated our learning approach on 
the MUC-4 task of extracting terrorist events from 
free texts.  We chose the MUC-4 task since man- 
ually prepared templates required for training are 
available.1   When trained and tested on the official 
benchmark data of MUC-4, our learning approach 
achieves accuracy competitive with the best MUC-4 
systems, which were all built using manually engi- 
neered rules. To our knowledge, our work is the first 
learning-based approach to have achieved perfor- 
mance competitive with the knowledge-engineering 
approach on the full-scale ST task.

2    Task Definition

The task addressed in this paper is the Scenario Tem- 
plate (ST) task defined in the Fourth Message Un- 
derstanding Conference (MUC-4).2 The objective of 
this task is to extract information on terrorist events 
occurring in Latin American countries from free text 
documents. For example, given the input document 
in Figure 1, an IE system is to extract information 
items related to any terrorist events to fill zero or 
more database records, or templates. Each distinct 
terrorist event is to fill one template.  An example 
of an output template is shown in Figure 2. Each of 
the 25 fields in the template is called a slot, and the 
string or value that fills a slot is called a slot fill.
  Different slots in the MUC-4 template need to be 
treated differently. Besides slot 0 (MESSAGE: ID) 
and slot 1 (MESSAGE: TEMPLATE), the other 23 
slots have to be extracted or inferred from the text 
document. These slots can be divided into the fol- 
lowing categories:
  String Slots.  These slots are filled using strings 
extracted directly from the text document (slot 6, 9,
10, 12, 18, 19).
  Text Conversion Slots.  These slots have to be 
inferred from strings in the document (slot 2, 14,
17, 21, 24). For example, INCIDENT: DATE has to
be inferred from temporal expressions such as “TO-

1http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/related projects/muc/
muc data/muc data index.html
    2The full-scale IE task is called the ST task only in MUC-6 
and MUC-7, when other subtasks like NE and TE tasks were 
defined. Here, we adopted this terminology also in describing 
the full-scale IE task for MUC-4.


 


Figure 3: ALICE: our information extraction system


DAY”, “LAST WEEK”, etc.
  Set Fill Slots. This category includes the rest of 
the slots.  The value of a set fill slot comes from a 
finite set of possible values. They often have to be 
inferred from the document.

3    The Learning Approach

Our supervised learning approach is illustrated in 
Figure 3.  Our system, called ALICE  (Automated 
Learning-based Information Content Extraction), 
requires manually extracted templates paired with 
their corresponding documents that contain terrorist 
events for training. After the training phase, ALICE 
is then able to extract relevant templates from new 
documents, using the model learnt during training.
In the training phase, each input training docu-
ment is first preprocessed through a chain of prepro- 
cessing modules. The outcome of the preprocessing 
is a full parse tree for each sentence, and corefer- 
ence chains linking various coreferring noun phrases 
both within and across sentences. The core of AL- 
ICE  uses supervised learning to build one classifier 
for each string slot. The candidates to fill a template 
slot are base (non-recursive) noun phrases. A noun 
phrase      that occurs in a training document    and 
fills a template slot   is used to generate one positive 
training example for the classifier of slot   .  Other 
noun phrases in the training document     are neg- 
ative training examples for the classifier of slot   .



The features of a training example generated from 
are the verbs and other noun phrases (serving 
roles like agent and patient) related to	in the same 
sentence, as well as similar features for coreferring 
noun phrases of	.  Thus, our features for a tem- 
plate slot classifier encode semantic (agent and pa- 
tient roles) and discourse (coreference) information. 
Our experimental results in this paper demonstrate 
that such features are effective in learning what to
fill a template slot.
  During testing, a new document is preprocessed 
through the same chain of preprocessing modules. 
Each candidate noun phrase       generates one test 
example, and it is presented to the classifier of a tem- 
plate slot    to determine whether      fills the slot  . 
A separate template manager decides whether a new 
template should be created to include slot  , or slot
should fill the existing template.

3.1   Preprocessing

All the preprocessing modules of ALICE were built 
with supervised learning techniques.  They include 
sentence segmentation (Ratnaparkhi, 1998), part-of- 
speech tagging (Charniak et al., 1993), named en- 
tity recognition (Chieu and Ng, 2002b), full parsing 
(Collins, 1999), and coreference resolution (Soon et 
al., 2001).  Each module performs at or near state- 
of-the-art accuracy, but errors are unavoidable, and 
later modules in the preprocessing chain have to deal 
with errors made by the previous modules.

3.2   Features in Training and Test Examples

As mentioned earlier, the features of an example are 
generated based on a base noun phrase (denoted as 
baseNP), which is a candidate for filling a template 
slot. While most strings that fill a string slot are base 
noun phrases, this is not always the case.  For in- 
stance, consider the two examples in Figure 4. In the 
first example, “BOMB” should fill the string slot IN- 
CIDENT: INSTRUMENT ID, while in the second 
example, “FMLN” should fill the string slot PERP: 
ORGANIZATION ID. However, “BOMB” is itself 
not a baseNP (the baseNP is “A BOMB EXPLO- 
SION”). Similarly for “FMLN”.
  As such, a string that fills a template slot but is 
itself not a baseNP (like “BOMB”) is also used to 
generate a training example, by using its smallest en- 
compassing noun phrase (like “A BOMB EXPLO-



(1) ONE PERSON WAS KILLED TONIGHT AS THE RE- 
SULT OF A BOMB EXPLOSION IN SAN SALVADOR.
(2) FORTUNATELY, NO CASUALTIES WERE REPORTED 
AS A RESULT OF THIS INCIDENT, FOR WHICH THE 
FMLN GUERRILLAS ARE BEING HELD RESPONSIBLE.


Figure 4: Sentences illustrating string slots that can- 
not be filled by baseNPs.


(1) MEMBERS OF THAT SECURITY GROUP ARE COMB- 
ING THE AREA TO DETERMINE THE FINAL OUTCOME 
OF THE FIGHTING.
(2) A BOMB WAS THROWN AT THE HOUSE OF FRE-
DEMO CANDIDATE FOR DEPUTY MIGUEL ANGEL 
BARTRA BY TERRORISTS.


Figure 5:  Sample sentences for the illustration of 
features


SION”) to generate the training example features. 
During training, a list of such words is compiled for 
slots 6 and 10 from the training templates. During 
testing, these words are also used as candidates for 
generating test examples for slots 6 and 10, in addi- 
tion to base NPs.
  The features of an example are derived from the 
treebank-style parse tree output by an implementa- 
tion of Collins' parser (Collins, 1999). In particular, 
we traverse the full parse tree to determine the verbs, 
agents, patients, and indirect objects related to a 
noun phrase candidate    . While a machine learning 
approach is used in (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2000) to 
determine general semantic roles, we used a simple 
rule-based traversal of the parse tree instead, which 
could also reliably determine the generic agent and 
patient role of a sentence, and this suffices for our 
current purpose.
Specifically, for a given noun phrase candidate
, the following groups of features are used:
  Verb of Agent NP (VAg) When	is an agent 
in a sentence, each of its associated verbs is a VAg 
feature. For example, in sentence (1) of Figure 5, if 
is MEMBERS, then its VAg features are COMB
and DETERMINE.
  Verb of Patient NP (VPa) When      is a patient 
in a sentence, each of its associated verbs is a VPa 
feature. For example, in sentence (2) of Figure 5, if
is BOMB, then its VPa feature is THROW.
Verb-Preposition of NP-in-PP (V-Prep) When
   

is the NP in a prepositional phrase PP, then this 
feature is the main verb and the preposition of PP. 
For example, in sentence (2) of Figure 5, if       is 
HOUSE, its V-Prep feature is THROW-AT.
  VPa and related NPs/PPs (VPaRel) If       is a 
patient in a sentence, each of its VPa may have its 
own agents (Ag) and prepositional phrases (Prep- 
NP). In this case, the tuples (VPa, Ag) and (VPa, 
Prep-NP) are used as features.   For example, in 
“GUARDS WERE SHOT TO DEATH”, if       is 
GUARDS, then its VPa SHOOT, and the preposi- 
tional phrase TO-DEATH form the feature (SHOOT, 
TO-DEATH).
  VAg and related NPs/PPs (VAgRel) This is sim- 
ilar to VPa above, but for VAg.
V-Prep and related NPs (V-PrepRel) When
is the NP in a prepositional phrase PP, then the main 
verb (V) may have its own agents (Ag) and pa- 
tients (Pa).   In this case, the tuples (Ag, V-Prep) 
and (V-Prep, Pa) are used as features. For example, 
HOUSE in sentence (2) of Figure 5 will have the fea- 
tures (TERRORIST, THROW-AT) and (THROW- 
AT, BOMB).
  Noun-Preposition (N-Prep) This feature aims at 
capturing information in phrases such as “MUR- 
DER OF THE PRIESTS”. If       is PRIESTS, this 
feature will be MURDER-OF.
  Head Word (H) The head word of each     is also 
used as a feature. In a parse tree, there is a head word 
at each tree node. In cases where a phrase does not 
fit into a parse tree node, the last word of the phrase 
is used as the head word. This feature is useful as 
the system has no information of the semantic class 
of     . From the head word, the system can get some 
clue to help decide if      is a possible candidate for a 
slot. For example, an      with head word PEASANT 
is more likely to fill the human target slot compared 
to another      with head word CLASH.
  Named Entity Class (NE) The named entity 
class of      is used as a feature.
  Real Head (RH) For a phrase that does not fit into 
a parse node, the head word feature is taken to be the 
last word of the phrase.  The real head word of its 
encompassing parse node is used as another feature. 
For example, in the NP “FMLN GUERRILLAS”, 
“FMLN” is a positive example for slot 10, with head 
word “FMLN” and real head “GUERRILLA”.
Coreference features Coreference chains found


by our coreference resolution module based on de- 
cision tree learning are used to determine the noun 
phrases that corefer with     .  In particular, we use 
the two noun phrases          and         , where
(        ) is the noun phrase that corefers with      and
immediately precedes (follows)     .  If such a pre- 
ceding (or following) noun phrase        exists, we 
generate the following features based on      : VAg, 
VPa, and N-Prep.
  To give an idea of the informative features used in 
the classifier of a slot, we rank the features used for 
a slot classifier according to their correlation met- 
ric values (Chieu and Ng, 2002a), where informa- 
tive features are ranked higher.  Table 1 shows the 
top-ranking features for a few feature groups and 
template slots.  The bracketed number behind each 
feature indicates the rank of this feature for that slot 
classifier, ordered by the correlation metric value. 
We observed that certain feature groups are more 
useful for certain slots. For example, DIE is the top 
VAg verb for the human target slot, and is ranked
12 among all features used for the human target slot. 
On the other hand, VAg is so unimportant for the 
physical target slot that the top VAg verb is due to a 
preprocessing error that made MONSERRAT a verb.

3.3   Supervised Learning Algorithms

We evaluated four supervised learning algorithms.
Maximum Entropy Classifier (Alice-ME)
  The maximum entropy (ME) framework is a re- 
cent learning approach which has been successfully 
used in various NLP tasks such as sentence segmen- 
tation, part-of-speech tagging, and parsing (Ratna- 
parkhi, 1998). However, to our knowledge, ours is 
the first research effort to have applied ME learn- 
ing to the full-scale ST task.  We used the imple- 
mentation of maximum entropy modeling from the 
opennlp.maxent package.3 .
  Support Vector Machine (Alice-SVM) The 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Vapnik, 1995) has 
been successfully used in many recent applications 
such as text categorization and handwritten digit 
recognition.  The learning algorithm finds a hyper- 
plane that separates the training data with the largest 
margin. We used a linear kernel for all our experi- 
ments.

3http://maxent.sourceforge.net
  

Naive Bayes (Alice-NB) The Naive Bayes (NB) 
algorithm (Duda and Hart, 1973) assumes the inde- 
pendence of features given the class and assigns a 
test example to the class which has the highest pos- 
terior probability. Add-one smoothing was used.
  Decision Tree (Alice-DT) The decision tree (DT) 
algorithm (Quinlan, 1993) partitions training exam- 
ples using the feature with the highest information 
gain. It repeats this process recursively for each par- 
tition until all examples in each partition belong to 
one class.
We used the WEKA package4 for the implemen-
tation of SVM, NB, and DT algorithms.
  A feature cutoff   is used for each algorithm: fea- 
tures occurring less than    times are rejected.  For 
all experiments,   is set to 3. For ME and SVM, no 
other feature selection is applied. For NB and DT, 
the top 100 features as determined by chi-square are 
selected. While not trying to do a serious compari- 
son of machine learning algorithms, ME and SVM 
seem to be able to perform well without feature 
selection, whereas NB and DT require some form 
of feature selection in order to perform reasonably 
well.

3.4   Template Manager

As each sentence is processed, phrases classified as 
positive for any of the string slots are sent to the 
Template Manager (TM), which will decide if a new 
template should be created when it receives a new 
slot fill.
  The system first attempts to attach a date and a lo- 
cation to each slot fill     .  Dates and locations are 
first attached to their syntactically nearest verb, by 
traversing the parse tree.  Then, for each string fill
  , we search its syntactically nearest verb    in the 
same manner and assign the date and location at- 
tached to    to     .
  When a new slot fill is found, the Template Man- 
ager will decide to start a new template if one of the 
following conditions is true:
  Date The date attached to the current slot fill is 
different from the date of the current template.
  Location The location attached to the current slot 
fill is not compatible with the location of the current 
template (one location does not contain the other).

4http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka



Slot
VAg
VPa
V-Prep
N-Prep
Human Target
Perpetrator Individual 
Physical Target 
Perpetrator Organization 
Instrument ID
DIE(12)
KIDNAP(5) 
MONSERRAT(420) 
KIDNAP(16) 
EXPLODE(4)
KILL(2)
IMPLICATE(17) 
DESTROY(1) 
BLAME(25) 
PLACE(5)
IDENTIFY-AS(47)
ISSUE-FOR(73) 
THROW-AT(32) 
SUSPEND-WITH(87) 
EQUIP-WITH(31)
MURDER-OF(3)
WARRANT-FOR(64) 
ATTACK-ON(11) 
GUERRILLA-OF(31) 
EXPLOSION-OF(17)

Table 1: The top-ranking feature for each group of features and the classifier of a slot





Incident Type
Seed Words
ATTACK
JESUIT, MURDER, KILL, ATTACK
BOMBING
BOMB, EXPLOS, DYNAMIT, EXPLOD, INJUR
KIDNAPPING
KIDNAP, ELN, RELEAS

Table 2: Stemmed seed words for each incident type


This is determined by using location lists provided 
by the MUC-4 conference, which specify whether 
one location is contained in another. An entry in this 
list has the format of “PLACE-NAME1:PLACE- 
NAME2”, where PLACE-NAME2 is contained in 
PLACE-NAME1 (e.g., CUBA: HAVANA (CITY)).
  Seed Word The sentence of the current slot fill 
contains a seed word for a different incident type. 
A number of seed words are automatically learned 
for each of the incident types ATTACK, BOMBING, 
and KIDNAPPING. They are automatically derived 
based on the correlation metric value used in (Chieu 
and Ng, 2002a).  For the remaining incident types, 
there are too few incidents in the training data for 
seed words to be collected.  The seeds words used 
are shown in Table 2.

3.5   Enriching Templates

In the last stage before output, the template content 
is further enriched in the following manner:
  Removal of redundant slot fills For each slot in 
the template, there might be several slot fills refer- 
ring to the same thing. For example, for HUM TGT: 
DESCRIPTION, the system might have found both 
“PRIESTS” and “JESUIT PRIESTS”. A slot fill that 
is a substring of another slot fill will be removed 
from the template.
  Effect/Confidence and Type Classifiers are also 
trained for effect and confidence slots 11, 16, and
23 (ES slots), as well as type slots 7, 13, and 20 
(TS slots). ES slots used exactly the same features 
as string slots, while TS slots used only head words 
and adjectives as features. For such slots, each entry 
refers to another slot fill. For example, slot 23 may 
contain the entry “DEATH” : “PRIESTS”, where


“PRIESTS” fills slot 19. During training, each train- 
ing example is a fill of a reference slot (e.g., for slot
23, the reference slots are slot 18 and 19). For slot
23, for example, each instance will have a class such 
as DEATH or INJURY, or if there is no entry in slot
23, UNKNOWN EFFECT. During testing, slot fills
of reference slots will be classified to determine if 
they should have an entry in an ES or a TS slot.
  Date and Location. If the system is unable to fill 
the DATE or LOCATION slot of a template, it will 
use as default value the date and country of the city 
in the dateline of the document.
  Other Slots. The remaining slots are filled with 
default values.  For example, slot 5 has the default 
value “ACCOMPLISHED”, and slot 8 “TERROR- 
IST ACT” (except when the perpetrator contains 
strings such as “GOVERNMENT”, in which case 
it will be changed to “STATE-SPONSORED VIO- 
LENCE”). Slot 15, 17, 22, and 24 are always left 
unfilled.

4    Evaluation

There are 1,300 training documents, of which 700 
are relevant (i.e., have one or more event templates). 
There are two official test sets, i.e., TST3 and TST4, 
containing 100 documents each. We trained our sys- 
tem ALICE  using the 700 documents with relevant 
templates, and then tested it on the two official test 
sets.  The output templates were scored using the 
scorer provided on the official website.
  The accuracy figures of ALICE  (with different 
learning algorithms) on string slots and all slots are 
listed in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively.  Accu- 
racy is measured in terms of recall (R), precision (P), 
and F-measure (F). We also list in the two tables the 
accuracy figures of the top 7 (out of a total of 17) 
systems that participated in MUC-4.  The accuracy 
figures in the two tables are obtained by running the 
official scorer on the output templates of ALICE, and 
those of the MUC-4 participating systems (available



Test set/slots
Systems in the same group
TST3/string
GE-CMU, SRI, UMASS, NYU
TST4/string
GE-CMU, Alice-SVM, NYU, SRI,
Alice-DT, UMASS
TST3/all
GE-CMU, UMASS, SRI, NYU
TST4/all
SRI, NYU, UMASS, Alice-SVM,
Alice-DT, BBN

Table 5: Systems whose F-measures are not signif- 
icantly different from Alice-ME at the 0.10 signifi- 
cance level with 0.99 confidence


Table 3: Accuracy of string slots on the TST3 and
TST4 test set


Table 6: Accuracy of string slots with and without 
full parsing












Table 4: Accuracy of all slots on the TST3 and TST4 
test set


on the official web site). The same history file down- 
loaded from the official web site is uniformly used 
for scoring the output templates of all systems (the 
history file contains the arbitration decisions for am- 
biguous cases).
  We conducted statistical significance test, using 
the approximate randomization method adopted in 
MUC-4. Table 5 shows the systems that are not sig- 
nificantly different from Alice-ME.
  Our system ALICE-ME, using a learning ap- 
proach, is able to achieve accuracy competitive to 
the best of the MUC-4 participating systems, which 
were all built using manually engineered rules. We 
also observed that ME and SVM, the more recent 
machine learning algorithms, performed better than 
DT and NB.
  Full Parsing. To illustrate the benefit of full pars- 
ing, we conducted experiments using a subset of fea- 
tures, with and without full parsing. We used ME as 
the learning algorithm in these experiments. The re- 
sults on string slots are summarized in Table 6. The


baseline system used only two features, head 
word (H) and named entity class (NE). Next, we 
added three features, VAg, VPa, and V-Prep. 
Without full parsing, these verbs were obtained 
based on the im- mediately preceding (or 
following) verb of a noun phrase, and the voice 
of the verb.  With full pars- ing, these verbs were 
obtained based on traversing the full parse tree. 
The results indicate that verb fea- tures contribute 
to the performance of the system, even without 
full parsing.  With full parsing, verbs can be 
determined more accurately, leading to better 
overall performance.

5    
Discussion

Although the best MUC-4 participating systems, 
GE/GE-CMU, still outperform ALICE-ME, it 
must be noted that for GE, “10 1/2 person 
months” were spent on MUC-4 using the GE 
NLTOOLSET , af- ter spending “15 person 
months” on MUC-3 (Rau et al., 1992). With a 
learning approach, IE systems are more portable 
across domains.
  Not all occurrences of a string in a document 
that match a slot fill of a template provide good 
positive training examples. For example, in the 
same docu- ment, there might be the following 
sentences “THE MNR REPORTS THE 
KIDNAPPING OF OQUELI COLINDRES...”, 
followed by “OQUELI COLIN- DRES 
ARRIVED IN GUATEMALA ON 11 JAN- 
UARY”. In this case, only the first occurrence 
of OQUELI COLINDRES should be used as a 
positive


example for the human target slot. However, ALICE 
does not have access to such information, since the 
MUC-4 training documents are not annotated (i.e., 
only templates are provided, but the text strings in a 
document are not marked). Thus, ALICE  currently 
uses all occurrences of “OQUELI COLINDRES” as 
positive training examples, which introduces noise 
in the training data. We believe that annotating the 
string occurrences in training documents will pro- 
vide higher quality training data for the learning ap- 
proach and hence further improve accuracy.
  Although part-of-speech taggers often boast of 
accuracy over 95%, the errors they make can be fatal 
to the parsing of sentences. For example, they often 
tend to confuse “VBN” with “VBD”, which could 
change the entire parse tree.  The MUC-4 corpus 
was provided as uppercase text, and this also has a 
negative impact on the named entity recognizer and 
part-of-speech tagger, which both make use of case 
information.
Learning approaches have been shown to perform
on par or even outperform knowledge-engineering 
approaches in  many  NLP  tasks.    However,  the 
full-scale scenario template IE task was still dom- 
inated by knowledge-engineering approaches.   In 
this paper, we demonstrate that using both state- 
of-art learning algorithms and full parsing, learning 
approaches can rival knowledge-engineering ones, 
bringing us a step closer to building full-scale IE 
systems in a domain-independent fashion with state- 
of-the-art accuracy.

Acknowledgements

We thank Kian Ming Adam Chai for the implemen- 
tation of the full parser.


References

M. E. Califf and R. J. Mooney. 1999. Relational learning 
of pattern-match rules for information extraction.  In 
Proceedings of AAAI99, pages 328–334.

E.   Charniak,   C.   Hendrickson,   N.   Jacobson,   and 
M. Perkowitz. 1993. Equations for part-of-speech tag- 
ging. In Proceedings of AAAI93, pages 784–789.

H. L. Chieu and H. T. Ng.   2002a.   A maximum en- 
tropy approach to information extraction from semi- 
structured and free text.  In Proceedings of AAAI02, 
pages 786–791.



H. L. Chieu and H. T. Ng.  2002b. Named entity recog- 
nition: A maximum entropy approach using global in- 
formation. In Proceedings of COLING02, pages 190–
196.

F. Ciravegna.   2001.   Adaptive information extraction 
from text by rule induction and generalisation. In Pro- 
ceedings of IJCAI01, pages 1251–1256.

M. Collins.   1999.   Head-driven statistical models for 
natural language parsing.  Ph.D. thesis, Department 
of Computer and Information Science, University of 
Pennsylvania.

R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart. 1973. Pattern Classification 
and Scene Analysis. Wiley, New York.

D.  Fisher,  S.  Soderland,  J.  McCarthy,  F.  Feng,  and 
W. Lehnert.  1995.  Description of the UMass system 
as used for MUC-6. In Proceedings of MUC-6, pages
127–140.

D. Gildea and D. Jurafsky. 2000. Automatic labelling of 
semantic roles. In Proceedings of ACL00, pages 512–
520.

S. Miller, M. Crystal, H. Fox, L. Ramshaw, R. Schwartz, 
R. Stone, R. Weischedel, and the Annotation Group.
1998.   Algorithms that learn to extract information
BBN: Description of the SIFT system as  used  for
MUC-7. In Proceedings of MUC-7.

J. R. Quinlan.    1993.	C4.5:  Programs for Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.

A. Ratnaparkhi.   1998.   Maximum Entropy Models for 
Natural Language Ambiguity Resolution.  Ph.D. the- 
sis, Department of Computer and Information Science, 
University of Pennsylvania.

L. Rau, G. Krupka, and P. Jacobs.   1992.   GE NL- 
TOOLSET: MUC-4 test results and analysis.  In Pro- 
ceedings of MUC-4, pages 94–99.

D. Roth and W. Yih. 2001. Relational learning via propo- 
sitional algorithms:  An information extraction case 
study. In Proceedings of IJCAI01, pages 1257–1263.

S.  Soderland.     1999.     Learning  information  extrac- 
tion rules for semi-structured and free text.  Machine 
Learning, 34(1/2/3):233–272.

W. M. Soon, H. T. Ng, and D. C. Y. Lim.  2001. A ma- 
chine learning approach to coreference resolution of 
noun phrases. Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521–
544.

V. N. Vapnik.  1995.  The Nature of Statistical Learning
Theory. Springer-Verlag, New York.
