Applying Coreference to Improve Name Recognition

Heng JI and Ralph GRISHMAN
Department of Computer Science
New York University
715 Broadway, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003, U.S.A.
hengji@cs.nyu.edu,	grishman@cs.nyu.edu





Abstract

We present a novel method of applying the 
results of coreference resolution to improve 
Name Recognition for Chinese.   We consider 
first some methods for gauging the confidence 
of  individual  tags  assigned  by  a  statistical 
name tagger.  For names with low confidence, 
we  show  how  these  names  can  be  filtered 
using  coreference  features  to  improve 
accuracy.  In addition, we present rules which 
use coreference information to correct some 
name tagging errors.  Finally, we show how 
these gains can be magnified by clustering 
documents and using cross-document 
coreference in these clusters.  These combined 
methods yield an absolute improvement of 
about 3.1% in tagger F score.



1     Introduction

  The	problem	of	name	recognition	and 
classification  has  been  intensively  studied  since
1995, when it was introduced as part of the MUC-
6 Evaluation (Grishman and Sundheim, 1996).  A 
wide  variety  of  machine learning  methods  have 
been applied to this problem, including Hidden 
Markov Models (Bikel et al. 1997), Maximum 
Entropy  methods  (Borthwick  et  al.  1998,  Chieu 
and Ng 2002), Decision Trees (Sekine et al. 1998), 
Conditional  Random  Fields  (McCallum  and  Li
2003),  Class-based  Language Model  (Sun  et  al.
2002), Agent-based Approach (Ye et al. 2002) and 
Support Vector Machines. However, the 
performance of even the best of these models1 has 
been limited by the amount of labeled training data 
available to them and the range of features which 
they employ.  In particular, most of these methods 
classify an instance of a name based on the 
information  about  that  instance  alone,  and  very 
local context of that instance – typically, one or


  1   The best results reported for Chinese named entity 
recognition, on the MET-2 test corpus, are 0.92 to 0.95
F-measure for the different name types (Ye et al. 2002).


two words preceding and following the name.  If a 
name has not been seen before, and appears in a 
relatively uninformative context, it becomes very 
hard to classify.
  We propose to use more global information to 
improve the performance of name recognition. 
Some  name  taggers  have  incorporated  a  name 
cache or similar mechanism which makes use of 
names previously recognized in the document.  In 
our approach, we perform coreference analysis and 
then use detailed evidence from other phrases in 
the document which are co-referential with this 
name in order to disambiguate the name.   This 
allows  us  to perform a  richer  set  of corrections 
than with a name cache.   We then go one step 
further and process similar documents containing 
instances of the same name, and combine the 
evidence from these additional instances.  At each 
step we are able to demonstrate a small but 
consistent  improvement  in  named  entity 
recognition.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section  2  briefly  describes  the  baseline  name 
tagger and coreference resolver used in this paper. 
Section 3 considers methods for assessing the 
confidence of name tagging decisions.   Section 4 
examines the distribution of name errors, as a 
motivation for using coreference information. 
Section 5 shows the coreference features we use 
and how they are incorporated into a statistical 
name filter.  Section 6 describes additional rules 
using coreference to improve name recognition. 
Section 7 provides the flow graph of the improved 
system.   Section 8 reports and discusses the 
experimental results while Section 9 summarizes 
the conclusions.

2     Baseline Systems

  The task we consider in this paper is to identify 
three classes of names in Chinese text:  persons 
(PER), organizations (ORG), and geo-political 
entities (GPE).  Geo-political entities are locations 
which  have  an  associated  government,  such  as


cities, states, and countries.2   Name recognition in 
Chinese poses extra challenges because neither 
capitalization nor word segmentation clues are 
explicitly  provided,  although  most  of  the 
techniques we describe are more generally 
applicable.
  Our study builds on an extraction system 
developed for the ACE evaluation, a multi-site 
evaluation of information extraction organized by 
the U.S. Government.      Following ACE 
terminology, we will use the term mention to refer 
to a name or noun phrase of one of the types of 
interest, and the term entity for a set of coreferring 
mentions.   We briefly describe in this section the 
baseline Chinese named entity tagger, as well as 
the coreference system, used in our experiments.

2.1    Chinese Name Tagger

  Our baseline name tagger consists of an HMM 
tagger augmented with a set of post-processing 
rules.   The HMM tagger generally follows the 
NYMBLE  model  (Bikel  et  al,  1997),  but  with  a 
larger  number  of  states  (12)  to  handle  name 
prefixes and suffixes, and transliterated foreign 
names separately.   It operates on the output of a 
word segmenter from Tsinghua University.  It uses 
a trigram model with dynamic backoff.  The post- 
processing rules correct some omissions and 
systematic errors using name lists (for example, a 
list of all Chinese last names; lists of organization 
and location suffixes) and particular contextual 
patterns  (for  example,  verbs  occurring  with 
people’s  names).      They  also  deal  with 
abbreviations and nested organization names.


2.2    Chinese Coreference Resolver

  For this study we have used a rule-based 
coreference resolver.   Table 1 lists the main rules 
and patterns used.   We have extensive rules for 
name-name coreference, including rules specific to 
the particular name types.  For these experiments, 
we do not  attempt  to resolve pronouns,  and  we 
only resolve names with nominals when the name 
and nominal appear in close proximity in a specific 
structure, as listed in Table 1.
We  have  used  the  MUC  coreference  scoring
metric (Vilain et al, 1995) to evaluate this resolver, 
excluding all pronouns and limiting ourselves to 
noun  phrases  of  semantic  type PER,  ORG,  and


Using the mentions generated by our extraction 
system, we obtain a recall of 74.3%, a precision of
84.5%, and an F score of 79.07%.3


3     Confidence Measures

  In  order  to  decide  when  we  need  to  rely  on 
global (coreference) information for name tagging, 
we  want  to have some  assessment  of  the 
confidence that the name tagger has in individual 
tagging decisions.  In this paper, we use two tools 
to reach this goal.  The first method is to use three 
manually built proper name lists which include 
common  names  of  each type (selected from the 
high frequency names in the user query blog of 
COMPASS, a Chinese search engine,  and  name 
lists provided by Linguistic Data Consortium; the 
PER list includes 147 names, the GPE list 226 
names, and the ORG list 130 names).   Names on 
these lists are accepted without further review.
  The second method is to have the HMM tagger 
compute a probability margin for the identification 
of a particular name as being of a particular type. 
Scheffer et al. (2001) used a similar method to 
identify good candidates for tagging in an active 
learner.  During decoding, the HMM tagger seeks 
the path of maximal probability through the Viterbi 
lattice.     Suppose we  wish to  evaluate the 
confidence with which words wi, …, wj are 
identified as a name of type T.  We compute


Margin (wi,…, wj; T) =  log P1 – log P2


Here P1 is the maximum path probability and P2 is 
the  maximum  probability  among  all  paths  for 
which some word in wi, …, wj  is assigned a tag 
other than T.
  A large margin indicates greater confidence in 
the tag assignment.   If we exclude names tagged 
with a margin below a threshold, we can increase
the precision of name tagging at some cost in recall.
Figure 1 shows the trade-off between margin 
threshold and name recognition performance. 
Names with a margin over 3.0 are accepted on this 
basis.


GPE.	Using  a  perfect  (hand-generated)  set  of	 	


mentions,   we   obtain   a   recall   of   82.7%   and 
precision  of  95.1%,  for  an  F  score  of  88.47%.


  2 This class is used in the U.S. Government’s ACE 
evaluations;  it excludes locations without governments, 
such as bodies of water and mountains.
  

3 In our scoring, we use the ACE keys and only score 
mentions which appear in both the key and system 
response.    This therefore includes only mentions 
identified as being in the ACE semantic categories by 
both  the  key  and  the  system  response.    Thus  these 
scores cannot be directly compared against coreference 
scores involving all noun phrases.



99

97

95

93

91

89

87

85
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9     10    11    12

Threshold

Figure 1: Tradeoff between Margin Threshold and 
name recognition performance


4   Distribution of Name Errors

  We consider now names which did not pass the 
confidence   measure   tests:   names   not   on   the 
common name list, which were tagged with a 
margin below the threshold.   We counted the 
accuracy of these “obscure” names as a function of 
the number of mentions in an entity; the results are 
shown in Table 2.
  The table shows that the accuracy of name 
recognition increases as the entity includes more 
mentions.    In  other  words,  if a  name has  more 
coref-ed mentions, it is more likely to be correct. 
This  also  provides  us  a  linguistic  intuition:  if 
people mention an obscure name in a text, they 
tend to emphasize it later by repeating the same 
name or describe it with nominal mentions.
  The  table  also  indicates  that  the  accuracy  of 
single  name  entities  (singletons)  is  much  lower 
than the overall accuracy.   So, although they 
constitute only about 10% of all names, increasing 
their accuracy can significantly improve overall 
performance.   Coreference information can play a 
great role here.  Take the 157 PER singletons as an 
example; 56% are incorrect names. Among these 
incorrect names, 73% actually belong to the other 
two name types.  Many of these can be easily fixed 
by searching for coreference to other mentions 
without type restriction.  Among the correct names,
71% can be confirmed by the presence of a title 
word or a Chinese last name.    From these 
observations we can conclude that without strong 
confirmation features, singletons are much less 
likely to be correct names.

5	Incorporating	Coreference	Information 
into Name Recognition

  We make use of several features of the 
coreference relations  a  name is  involved  in;  the


we built an independent classifier to predict if a 
name identified by the baseline name tagger is 
correct or not. (Note that this classifier is trained 
on   all   name   mentions,   but   during   test   only
‘obscure’ names which failed the tests in section 3
are processed by this classifier.) Each name 
corresponds to a feature vector which consists of 
the factors described in Table 3.  The PER context 
words are generated from the context patterns 
described in   (Ji and Luo, 2001).   We used a 
Support  Vector  Machine  to  implement  the 
classifier,  because  of  its  state-of-the-art 
performance and good generalization ability.   We 
used a polynomial kernel of degree 3.

6     Name Rules based on Coreference

  Besides the factors in the above statistical model, 
additional coreference information can be used to 
filter   and  in  some   cases   correct   the  tagging 
produced by the HMM.    We developed the 
following rules to correct names generated by the 
baseline tagger.

6.1    Name Structure Errors

  Sometimes  the  Name  tagger   outputs  names 
which are too short (incomplete) or too long.  We 
can make use of the relation among mentions in 
the same entity to fix them.   For example, nested 
ORGs are traditionally difficult to recognize 
correctly.   Errors in ORG names can take the 
following forms:

  (1) Head Missed. Examples: “中国艺术（团）/ 
Chinese Art (Group)”, “中国学生（会）/ Chinese 
Student (Union)”, “俄罗斯核动力（所）/ Russian
Nuclear Power (Instituition)”

  Rule 1: If an ORG name x is coref-ed with other 
mentions with head y (an ORG suffix), and in the 
original text x is immediately followed by y, then 
tag xy instead of x; otherwise discard x.

  (2) Modifier Missed. Rule 1 can also be used to 
restore missed modifiers. For example, “（爱丁 
堡）大学 / (Edinburgh) University”; “（鹏程）有 
限公司 / (Peng Cheng) Limited Corporation”, and
some incomplete translated PER names such as
“（巴）勒斯坦 / (Pa)lestine”.

(3) Name Too Long
  Rule 2: If a name x has no coref-ed mentions 
but part of it, x', is identical to a name in another 
entity y, and y includes at least two mentions; then 
tag x' instead of x.
.



Rule Type
Rule
Description










Name & 
Name


All
Ident(i, j)
Mentioni and Mentionj are identical


Abbrev(i, j)
Mentioni is an abbreviation of Mentionj


Modifier(i, j)
Mentionj = Modifier + “de” + Mentioni


Formal(i, j)
Formal and informal ways of referring to the same entity
(Ex. “美国国防部 / American Defense Dept. &
五角大楼/ Pentagon”)


PER
Substring(i, j)
Mentioni is a substring of Mentionj


Title(i, j)
Mentionj = Mentioni + title word; or
Mentionj = LastName + title word

ORG
Head(i, j)
Mentioni and Mentionj have the same head





GPE
Head(i, j)
Mentioni and Mentionj have the same head


Capital(i, j)
Mentioni: country name;
Mentionj: name of the capital of this country
Applied in restricted context.


Country(i, j)
Mentioni and Mentionj are different names referring to the same 
country.
(Ex. “中国 / China & 华夏 / Huaxia & 共和国 / Republic”)


Name & 
Nominal

All
RSub(i, j)
Namei is a right substring of Nominalj


Apposition(i, j)
Nominalj is the apposite of Namei


Modifier2(i, j)
Nominalj = Determiner/Modifier + Namei/ head


GPE
Ref(i, j)
Nominalj = Namei + GPE Ref Word
(examples of GPE Ref Word: “方面 / Side”, “政府/Government”,
“共和国 / Republic”, “自治政府/ Municipality”)
Nominal&
Nominal
All
IdentN(i, j)
Nominali and Nominalj are identical


Modifier3(i, j)
Nominalj = Determiner/Modifier + Nominali

Table1: Main rules used in the Coreference Resolver

Number of mentions
per entity
Name Type
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
>8
PER
43.94
87.07
91.23
87.95
91.57
91.92
94.74
92.31
97.36
GPE
55.81
88.8
96.07
100
100
100
100
95.83
97.46
ORG
64.71
80.59
89.47
94.29
100
100
--
--
100

Table 2 Accuracy(%) of ‘obscure’ name recognition

Factor
Description
Coreference Type
Weight
Average of weights of coreference relations for which this mention
is antecedent:  0.8 for name-name coreference; 0.5 for apposition;
0.3 for other name-nominal coreference


Mention
Weight
First
Mention
Is first name mention in the entity

Head
Includes head word of name

Idiom
Name is part of an idiom

PER context
For PER Name, has context word in text

PER title
For PER Name, includes title word

ORG suffix
For ORG Name, includes suffix word
Entity Weight
Number of mentions in entity / total number of mentions in all
entities in document which include a name mention


Table 3 Coreference factors for name recognition



6.2	Name Type Errors

  Some names are mistakenly recognized as other 
name types.  For example, the name tagger has 
difficulty  in   distinguishing  transliterated  PER 
name and transliterated GPE names.
  To  solve  this  problem  we  designed  the 
following rules based on the relation among 
entities.


7	System Flow

  Combining all the methods presented above, the 
flow of our final system is shown in Figure 2:


Input


  Rule 3: If namei is recognized as type1, the 
entity it belongs to has only one mention; and 
namej  is recognized as type2, the entity it belongs 
to has at least two mentions; and namei is identical 
with namej  or namei  is a substring of namej, then 
correct type1 to type2.

  For  example,  if  “ 克里姆林 /  Kremlin”  is 
mistakenly identified as PER, while “克里姆林宫
  

Name tagger







Coreference
Resolver


Coreference


Nominal mention tagger


/ Kremlin Palace” is correctly identified as ORG, 
and in coreference results, “克里姆林 / Kremlin” 
belongs to a singleton entity, while “克里姆林宫 /
Kremlin Palace” has coref-ed mentions, then we 
correct the type of “克里姆林 / Kremlin” to ORG.

  Another common mistake gives rise to the 
sequence “PER+title+PER”, because our name 
tagger uses the title word as an important context 
feature for a person name (either preceding or 
following the title).   But this is an impossible 
structure in Chinese.  We can also use coreference 
information to fix it.
  Rule  4:  If  “PER+title+PER”  appears  in  the 
name tagger’s output,  then we discard the PER 
name with lower coref certainty; and check 
whether it is coref-ed to other mentions in a GPE 
entity or ORG entity; if it is, correct the type.
  Using this rule we can correctly identify “[斯里 
兰卡 / Sri Lanka GPE] 总理 / Premier [班达拉耐
克 / Bandaranaike PER]”, instead of “[斯里兰卡 /
Sri Lanka PER] 总理 / Premier [班达拉耐克 /
Bandaranaike PER]”.


6.3    Name Abbreviation Errors

  Name abbreviations are difficult to recognize 
correctly due to a lack of training data.   Usually 
people adopt a separate list of abbreviations or 
design separate rules (Sun et al. 2002) to identify 
them.  But many wrong abbreviation names might 
be  produced.      We  find  that  coreference 
information helps to select abbreviations.
  Rule 5: If an abbreviation name has no coref-ed 
mentions   and   it   is   not   adjacent   to   another
abbreviation (ex. “ 中/China 美/America”),  then
we discard it.


Rules to fix	name
errors

SVM classifier to select 
correct names using 
coreference features



Output



Figure 2  System Flow


8     Experiments

8.1    Training and Test Data

  For our experiments, we used the Beijing 
University Insititute of Computational Linguistics 
corpus – 2978 documents from the People’s Daily 
in 1998, one million words with name tags – and 
the training corpus for  the 2003 ACE evaluation,
223 documents.  153 of our ACE documents were 
used  as  our  test  set. 4       The  153  documents 
contained 1614 names.   Of the system-tagged 
names, 959 were considered ‘obscure’:  were not 
on a name list and had a margin below the 
threshold.   These were the names to which the 
rules and classifier were applied.   We ran all the 
following experiments using the MUC scorer.


  4 The test set was divided into two parts, of 95 
documents and 58 documents.   We trained two name 
tagger and classifier models, each time using one part 
of the test set along with all the other documents, and 
evaluated on the other part of the test set.  The results 
reported here are the combined results for the entire 
test set.



  Table 4 shows the performance of the baseline 
system; Table 5 the system with rule-based 
corrections;  and  Table  6  the  system  with  both 
rules and the SVM classifier.


retrieving  related  documents  from 
sina.com.cn.  In total, we added 52 texts to 
these 11 clusters.  The net result was a further 
improvement of 0.3% in F score (Table 8).6



Name
Precision
Recall
F
PER
90.9
88.2
89.5
GPE
82.3
90.8
86.3
ORG
92.1
91.8
91.9
ALL
87.8
90.5
89.1



Table 4 Baseline Name Tagger



Table 7 Results for Mutiple Document 
System



Name
Precision
Recall
F
PER
93.3
87.5
90.3
GPE
83.5
90.4
86.8
ORG
90.9
92.1
91.5
ALL
88.5
90.3
89.4



Table 5 Results with Coref Rules Alone

Name
Precision
Recall
F
PER
95.7
84.4
89.7
GPE
88.0
91.7
89.8
ORG
94.5
91.2
92.8
ALL
92.2
89.6
90.9

Table 6 Results for Single Document System

  The gains we observed from coreference within 
single documents suggested that further 
improvement might be possible by gathering 
evidence from several related documents. 5     We 
did this in two stages.  First, we clustered the 153 
documents in the test set into 38 topical clusters. 
Most (29) of the clusters had only two documents; 
the largest had 28 documents.   We then applied 
the same procedures, treating the entire cluster as 
a single document.   This yielded another 1.0% 
improvement in overall F score (Table 7).
  The improvement in F score was consistent for 
the larger clusters (3 or more documents):  the F 
score  improved  for   8  of   those  clusters   and 
remained the same for the 9th.  To heighten the 
multi-document benefit, we took 11 of the small



  5 Borthwick (1999) did use some cross-document 
information across the entire test corpus, maintaining 
in effect a name cache for the corpus, in addition to one 
for the document.   No attempt was made to select or 
cluster documents.



Table 8 Results for Mutiple Document System 
with additional retrieved texts


8.3	Contribution of Coreference Features

  Since feature selection is crucial to SVMs, we 
did experiments to determine how precision 
increased as each feature was added.  The results 
are shown in Figure 3.   We can see that each 
feature in the SVM helps to select correct names 
from the output of the baseline name tagger, 
although   some   (like   FirstMention)   are   more 
crucial than others.


93
92
91
90
89
88
87


Feature


Figure 3  Contributions of features



  6   Scores   are   still   computed   on   the   153   test 
documents ;    the  retrieved  documents  are  excluded 
from the scoring.


8.4    Comparison to Cache Model

  Some named entity systems use a name cache, 
in which tokens or complete names which have 
been previously assigned a tag are available as 
features in tagging the remainder of a document. 
Other systems have made a second tagging pass 
which   uses   information   on   token   sequences 
tagged in the first pass (Borthwick 1999), or have 
used as features information about features 
assigned to other instances of the same token 
(Chieu and Ng 2002).  Our system, while more 
complex, makes use of a richer set of global 
features, involving the detailed structure of 
individual mentions, and in particular makes use 
of both name – name and name – nominal 
relations.

  We have compared the performance of our 
method  (applied  to  single  documents)  with  a 
voted cache model, which takes into account the 
number of times a particular name has been 
previously assigned each type of tag:

System
Precision
Recall
F
baseline
88.8
90.5
89.1
voted cache
87.6
92.8
90.1
current
92.2
89.6
90.9

Table 9.  Comparison with voted cache

  Compared to a simple voted cache model, our 
model provides a greater improvement in name 
recognition F score; in particular, it can 
substantially increase the precision of name 
recognition.  The voted cache model can recover 
some missed names, but at some loss in precision.

9     Conclusions and Future Work

  In this paper, we presented a novel idea of 
applying   coreference   information   to   improve 
name recognition.  We used both a statistical filter 
based on a set of coreference features and rules 
for correcting specific errors in name recognition. 
Overall, we obtained an absolute improvement of
3.1% in F score.  Put another way, we were able 
to eliminate about 60% of erroneous name tags 
with only a small loss in recall.
  The methods were tested on a Chinese name 
tagger, but most of the techniques should be 
applicable to other languages.  More generally, it 
offers an example of using global and cross- 
document information to improve local decisions 
for information extraction.  Such methods will be 
important for breaking the ‘performance ceiling’ 
in many areas of information extraction.
  

In the future, we plan to experiment with 
improvements in coreference resolution (in 
particular, adding pronoun resolution) to see if we 
can obtain further gains in name recognition.  We 
also intend to explore the production of multiple 
tagging hypotheses by our statistical name tagger, 
with  the  alternative  hypotheses  then  reranked 
using global information.  This may allow us to 
replace some of our hand-coded error-correction 
rules with corpus-trained methods.

10	Acknowledgements

  This research was supported by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency as part of the 
Translingual  Information  Detection,  Extraction 
and   Summarization   (TIDES)   program,   under 
Grant N66001-001-1-8917 from the Space and 
Naval Warfare Systems Center San Diego, and by 
the  National  Science  Foundation  under  Grants 
IIS-0081962 and 0325657.  This paper does not 
necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the 
U.S. Government.

References

Daniel M. Bikel, Scott Miller, Richard Schuartz, 
and Ralph Weischedel. 1999. Nymble: a high- 
performance Learning Name-finder.  Proc. Fifth 
Conf. On Applied Natural Language Processing, 
Washington, D.C.
Andrew Borthwick.  1999. A Maximum Entropy 
Approach to Named Entity Recognition.  Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Dept. of Computer Science, New 
York University.
Andrew Borthwick, John Sterling, Eugene 
Agichtein,  and  Ralph  Grishman.  1998. 
Exploiting Diverse Knowledge Sources via 
Maximum  Entropy  in  Named  Entity 
Recognition. Proc. Sixth Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, Montreal, Canada.
Hai  Leong  Chieu  and  Hwee  Tou  Ng.  2002. 
Named  Entity  Recognition:  A  Maximum 
Entropy Approach Using Global Information. 
Proc.: 17th Int’l Conf. on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 2002), Taipei, Taiwan.
Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim.   1996. 
Message understanding conference - 6: A brief 
history. Proc. 16th Int’l Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING 96), 
Copenhagen.
Heng Ji, Zhensheng Luo, 2001. A Chinese Name 
Identifying System Based on Inverse Name 
Frequency Model and Rules. Natural Language 
Processing and Knowledge Engineering 
(NLPKE)   Mini   Symposium   of   2001   IEEE


International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC2001)
Andrew McCallum and Wei Li.   2003.   Early 
results for Named Entity Recognition With 
Conditional Random Fields, Feature Induction, 
and Web-Enhanced Lexicons. Proc. Seventh 
Conf. on Computational Natural Language 
Learning (CONLL-2003), Edmonton, Canada.
Tobias Scheffer, Christian Decomain, and Stefan 
Wrobel. 2001. Active Hidden Markov Models 
for Information Extraction. Proc. Int’l 
Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis (IDA-
2001).
Satoshi Sekine, Ralph Grishman and Hiroyuki 
Shinnou. 1998. A Decision Tree Method for 
Finding and Classifying Names in Japanese 
Texts.   Proc. Sixth Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora; Montreal, Canada.
Jian Sun, Jianfeng Gao, Lei Zhang, Ming Zhou 
and Changning Huang. 2002. Chinese Named 
Entity Identification Using Class-based 
Language Model.  Coling 2002.
Marc Vilain, John Burger, John Aberdeen, Dennis 
Connelly, Lynette Hirschman. 1995. A model -- 
Theoretic Coreference Scoring Scheme. MUC-6
Proceedings, Nov. 1995.
Shiren Ye, Tat-Seng Chua, Liu Jimin. 2002. An 
Agent-based   Approach   to   Chinese   Named 
Entity Recognition. Coling 2002.






