Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 186?195,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Entity-based local coherence modelling using topological fields
Jackie Chi Kit Cheung and Gerald Penn
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, M5S 3G4, Canada
{jcheung,gpenn}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
One goal of natural language generation is
to produce coherent text that presents in-
formation in a logical order. In this pa-
per, we show that topological fields, which
model high-level clausal structure, are an
important component of local coherence
in German. First, we show in a sen-
tence ordering experiment that topologi-
cal field information improves the entity
grid model of Barzilay and Lapata (2008)
more than grammatical role and simple
clausal order information do, particularly
when manual annotations of this informa-
tion are not available. Then, we incor-
porate the model enhanced with topolog-
ical fields into a natural language gen-
eration system that generates constituent
orders for German text, and show that
the added coherence component improves
performance slightly, though not statisti-
cally significantly.
1 Introduction
One type of coherence modelling that has captured
recent research interest is local coherence mod-
elling, which measures the coherence of a docu-
ment by examining the similarity between neigh-
bouring text spans. The entity-based approach,
in particular, considers the occurrences of noun
phrase entities in a document (Barzilay and Lap-
ata, 2008). Local coherence modelling has been
shown to be useful for tasks like natural language
generation and summarization, (Barzilay and Lee,
2004) and genre classification (Barzilay and Lap-
ata, 2008).
Previous work on English, a language with rel-
atively fixed word order, has identified factors that
contribute to local coherence, such as the gram-
matical roles associated with the entities. There is
good reason to believe that the importance of these
factors vary across languages. For instance, freer-
word-order languages exhibit word order patterns
which are dependent on discourse factors relating
to information structure, in addition to the gram-
matical roles of nominal arguments of the main
verb. We thus expect word order information to be
particularly important in these languages in dis-
course analysis, which includes coherence mod-
elling.
For example, Strube and Hahn (1999) introduce
Functional Centering, a variant of Centering The-
ory which utilizes information status distinctions
between hearer-old and hearer-new entities. They
apply their model to pronominal anaphora reso-
lution, identifying potential antecedents of sub-
sequent anaphora by considering syntactic and
word order information, classifying constituents
by their familiarity to the reader. They find that
their approach correctly resolves more pronomi-
nal anaphora than a grammatical role-based ap-
proach which ignores word order, and the differ-
ence between the two approaches is larger in Ger-
man corpora than in English ones. Unfortunately,
their criteria for ranking potential antecedents re-
quire complex syntactic information in order to
classify whether proper names are known to the
hearer, which makes their algorithm hard to auto-
mate. Indeed, all evaluation is done manually.
We instead use topological fields, a model of
clausal structure which is indicative of information
structure in German, but shallow enough to be au-
tomatically parsed at high accuracy. We test the
hypothesis that they would provide a good com-
plement or alternative to grammatical roles in lo-
cal coherence modelling. We show that they are
superior to grammatical roles in a sentence or-
dering experiment, and in fact outperforms sim-
ple word-order information as well. We further
show that these differences are particularly large
when manual syntactic and grammatical role an-
186
Millionen von Mark   verschwendet   der Senat jeden Monat,   weil   er   sparen will. 
LK MF VCVF LK MF
S
NF
S
?The senate wastes millions of marks each month, because it wants to save.?
Figure 1: The clausal and topological field structure of a German sentence. Notice that the subordinate
clause receives its own topology.
notations are not available.
We then embed these topological field annota-
tions into a natural language generation system to
show the utility of local coherence information in
an applied setting. We add contextual features
using topological field transitions to the model
of Filippova and Strube (2007b) and achieve a
slight improvement over their model in a con-
stituent ordering task, though not statistically sig-
nificantly. We conclude by discussing possible
reasons for the utility of topological fields in lo-
cal coherence modelling.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 German Topological Field Parsing
Topological fields are sequences of one or more
contiguous phrases found in an enclosing syntac-
tic region, which is the clause in the case of the
German topological field model (Ho?hle, 1983).
These fields may have constraints on the number
of words or phrases they contain, and do not nec-
essarily form a semantically coherent constituent.
In German, the topology serves to identify all of
the components of the verbal head of a clause, as
well as clause-level structure such as complemen-
tizers and subordinating conjunctions. Topologi-
cal fields are a useful abstraction of word order,
because while Germanic word order is relatively
free with respect to grammatical functions, the or-
der of the topological fields is strict and unvarying.
A German clause can be considered to be an-
chored by two ?brackets? which contain modals,
verbs and complementizers. The left bracket (linke
Klammer, LK) may contain a complementizer,
subordinating conjunction, or a finite verb, de-
pending on the clause type, and the right bracket
contains the verbal complex (VC). The other topo-
logical fields are defined in relation to these two
brackets, and contain all other parts of the clause
such as verbal arguments, adjuncts, and discourse
cues.
The VF (Vorfeld or ?pre-field?) is so-named be-
cause it occurs before the left bracket. As the first
constituent of most matrix clauses in declarative
sentences, it has special significance for the coher-
ence of a passage, which we will further discuss
below. The MF (Mittelfeld or ?middle field?) is
the field bounded by the two brackets. Most verb
arguments, adverbs, and prepositional phrases are
found here, unless they have been fronted and put
in the VF, or are prosodically heavy and postposed
to the NF field. The NF (Nachfeld or ?post-field?)
contains prosodically heavy elements such as post-
posed prepositional phrases or relative clauses,
and occasionally postposed noun phrases.
2.2 The Role of the Vorfeld
One of the reasons that we use topological fields
for local coherence modelling is the role that the
VF plays in signalling the information structure of
German clauses, as it often contains the topic of
the sentence.
In fact, its role is much more complex than be-
ing simply the topic position. Dipper and Zins-
meister (2009) distinguish multiple uses of the VF
depending on whether it contains an element re-
lated to the surrounding discourse. They find that
45.1% of VFs are clearly related to the previous
context by a reference or discourse relation, and a
further 21.9% are deictic and refer to the situation
described in the passage in a corpus study. They
also run a sentence insertion experiment where
subjects are asked to place an extracted sentence
in its original location in a passage. The authors
remark that extracted sentences with VFs that are
referentially related to previous context (e.g., they
contain a coreferential noun phrase or a discourse
relation like ?therefore?) are reinserted at higher
accuracies.
187
a)
# Original Sentence and Translation
1
Einen Zufluchtsort fu?r Frauen, die von ihren Ma?nnern mi?handelt werden, gibt es nunmehr auch
in Treptow.
?There is now a sanctuary for women who are mistreated by their husbands in Treptow as well.?
2
Das Bezirksamt bietet Frauen (auch mit Kindern) in derartigen Notsituationen voru?bergehend
eine Unterkunft.
?The district office offers women (even with children) in this type of emergency temporary
accommodation.?
3
Zugleich werden die Betroffenen der Regelung des Unterhalts, bei Beho?rdenga?ngen und auch
bei der Wohnungssuche unterstu?tzt.
?At the same time, the affected are supported with provisions of necessities, in dealing with
authorities, and also in the search for new accommodations.?
b)
DE Zufluchtsort Frauen Ma?nnern Treptow Kindern
EN sanctuary women husbands Treptow children
1 acc oth oth oth ?
2 ? oth ? ? oth
3 ? nom ? ? ?
c)
? ? ? nom ? acc ? oth nom ? nom nom nom acc nom oth
0.3 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
acc ? acc nom acc acc acc oth oth ? oth nom oth acc oth oth
0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.1
Table 1: a) An example of a document from Tu?Ba-D/Z, b) an abbreviated entity grid representation of
it, and c) the feature vector representation of the abbreviated entity grid for transitions of length two.
Mentions of the entity Frauen are underlined. nom: nominative, acc: accusative, oth: dative, oblique,
and other arguments
Filippova and Strube (2007c) also examine the
role of the VF in local coherence and natural lan-
guage generation, focusing on the correlation be-
tween VFs and sentential topics. They follow Ja-
cobs (2001) in distinguishing the topic of addres-
sation, which is the constituent for which the
proposition holds, and frame-setting topics, which
is the domain in which the proposition holds, such
as a temporal expression. They show in a user
study that frame-setting topics are preferred to top-
ics of addressation in the VF, except when a con-
stituent needs to be established as the topic of ad-
dressation.
2.3 Using Entity Grids to Model Local
Coherence
Barzilay and Lapata (2008) introduce the entity
grid as a method of representing the coherence of a
document. Entity grids indicate the location of the
occurrences of an entity in a document, which is
important for coherence modelling because men-
tions of an entity tend to appear in clusters of
neighbouring or nearby sentences in coherent doc-
uments. This last assumption is adapted from Cen-
tering Theory approaches to discourse modelling.
In Barzilay and Lapata (2008), an entity grid is
constructed for each document, and is represented
as a matrix in which each row represents a sen-
tence, and each column represents an entity. Thus,
a cell in the matrix contains information about an
entity in a sentence. The cell is marked by the
presence or absence of the entity, and can also be
augmented with other information about the en-
tity in this sentence, such as the grammatical role
of the noun phrase representing that entity in that
sentence, or the topological field in which the noun
phrase appears.
Consider the document in Table 1. An entity
grid representation which incorporates the syntac-
tic role of the noun phrase in which the entity ap-
188
pears is also shown (not all entities are listed for
brevity). We tabulate the transitions of entities be-
tween different syntactic positions (or their non-
occurrence) in sentences, and convert the frequen-
cies of transitions into a feature vector representa-
tion of transition probabilities in the document.
To calculate transition probabilities, we divide
the frequency of a particular transition by the total
number of transitions of that length.
This model of local coherence was investigated
for German by Filippova and Strube (2007a). The
main focus of that work, however, was to adapt
the model for use in a low-resource situation when
perfect coreference information is not available.
This is particularly useful in natural language un-
derstanding tasks. They employ a semantic clus-
tering model to relate entities. In contrast, our
work focuses on improving performance by anno-
tating entities with additional linguistic informa-
tion, such as topological fields, and is geared to-
wards natural language generation systems where
perfect information is available.
Similar models of local coherence include vari-
ous Centering Theory accounts of local coherence
((Kibble and Power, 2004; Poesio et al, 2004)
inter alia). The model of Elsner and Charniak
(2007) uses syntactic cues to model the discourse-
newness of noun phrases. There are also more
global content models of topic shifts between sen-
tences like Barzilay and Lee (2004).
3 Sentence Ordering Experiments
3.1 Method
We test a version of the entity grid representa-
tion augmented with topological fields in a sen-
tence ordering experiment corresponding to Ex-
periment 1 of Barzilay and Lapata (2008). The
task is a binary classification task to identify the
original version of a document from another ver-
sion which contains the sentences in a randomly
permuted order, which is taken to be incoherent.
We solve this problem in a supervised machine
learning setting, where the input is the feature vec-
tor representations of the two versions of the doc-
ument, and the output is a binary value indicating
the document with the original sentence ordering.
We use SVMlight?s ranking module for classifi-
cation (Joachims, 2002).
The corpus in our experiments consists of the
last 480 documents of Tu?Ba-D/Z version 4 (Telljo-
hann et al, 2004), which contains manual corefer-
ence, grammatical role and topological field infor-
mation. This set is larger than the set that was used
in Experiment 1 of Barzilay and Lapata (2008),
which consists of 400 documents in two English
subcorpora on earthquakes and accidents respec-
tively. The average document length in the Tu?Ba-
D/Z subcorpus is also greater, at 19.2 sentences
compared to about 11 for the two subcorpora. Up
to 20 random permutations of sentences were gen-
erated from each document, with duplicates re-
moved.
There are 216 documents and 4126 original-
permutation pairs in the training set, and 24 docu-
ments and 465 pairs in the development set. The
remaining 240 documents are in the final test set
(4243 pairs). The entity-based model is parame-
terized as follows.
Transition length ? the maximum length of the
transitions used in the feature vector representa-
tion of a document.
Representation ? when marking the presence of
an entity in a sentence, what information about
the entity is marked (topological field, grammat-
ical role, or none). We will describe the represen-
tations that we try in section 3.2.
Salience ? whether to set a threshold for the fre-
quency of occurrence of entities. If this is set, all
entities below a certain frequency are treated sep-
arately from those reaching this frequency thresh-
old when calculating transition probabilities. In
the example in Table 1, with a salience thresh-
old of 2, Frauen would be treated separately from
Ma?nnern or Kindern.
Transition length, salience, and a regularization
parameter are tuned on the development set. We
only report results using the setting of transition
length ? 4, and no salience threshold, because
they give the best performance on the development
set. This is in contrast to the findings of Barzi-
lay and Lapata (2008), who report that transition
length ? 3 and a salience threshold of 2 perform
best on their data.
3.2 Entity Representations
The main goal of this study is to compare word
order, grammatical role and topological field in-
formation, which is encoded into the entity grid at
each occurrence of an entity. Here, we describe
the variants of the entity representations that we
compare.
189
Baseline Representations We implement sev-
eral baseline representations against which we test
our topological field-enhanced model. The sim-
plest baseline representation marks the mere ap-
pearance of an entity without any additional infor-
mation, which we refer to as default.
Another class of baseline representations mark
the order in which entities appear in the clause.
The correlation between word order and informa-
tion structure is well known, and has formed the
basis of some theories of syntax such as the Prague
School?s (Sgall et al, 1986). The two versions
of clausal order we tried are order 1/2/3+,
which marks a noun phrase as the first, the sec-
ond, or the third or later to appear in a clause, and
order 1/2+, which marks a noun phrase as the
first, or the second or later to appear in a clause.
Since noun phrases can be embedded in other
noun phrases, overlaps can occur. In this case, the
dominating noun phrase takes the smallest order
number among its dominated noun phrases.
The third class of baseline representations we
employ mark an entity by its grammatical role
in the clause. Barzilay and Lapata (2008) found
that grammatical role improves performance in
this task for an English corpus. Because Ger-
man distinguishes more grammatical roles mor-
phologically than English, we experiment with
various granularities of role labelling. In particu-
lar, subj/obj distinguishes the subject position,
the object position, and another category for all
other positions. cases distinguishes five types of
entities corresponding to the four morphological
cases of German in addition to another category
for noun phrases which are not complements of
the main verb.
Topological Field-Based These representations
mark the topological field in which an entity ap-
pears. Some versions mark entities which are
prepositional objects separately. We try versions
which distinguish VF from non-VF, as well as
more general versions that make use of a greater
set of topological fields. vfmarks the noun phrase
as belonging to a VF (and not in a PP) or not.
vfpp is the same as above, but allows preposi-
tional objects inside the VF to be marked as VF.
topf/pp distinguishes entities in the topological
fields VF, MF, and NF, contains a separate cat-
egory for PP, and a category for all other noun
phrases. topf distinguishes between VF, MF, and
NF, on the one hand, and everything else on the
other. Prepositional objects are treated the same
as other noun phrases here.
Combined We tried a representation which
combines grammatical role and topological field
into a single representation, subj/obj?vf,
which takes the Cartesian product of subj/obj
and vf above.
Topological fields do not map directly to topic-
focus distinctions. For example, besides the topic
of the sentence, the Vorfeld may contain discourse
cues, expletive pronouns, or the informational or
contrastive focus. Furthermore, there are addi-
tional constraints on constituent order related to
pronominalization. Thus, we devised additional
entity representations to account for these aspects
of German.
topic attempts to identify the sentential topic
of a clause. A noun phrase is marked as TOPIC
if it is in VF as in vfpp, or if it is the first
noun phrase in MF and also the first NP in the
clause. Other noun phrases in MF are marked
as NONTOPIC. Categories for NF and miscella-
neous noun phrases also exist. While this repre-
sentation may appear to be very similar to sim-
ply distinguishing the first entity in a clause as for
order 1/2+ in that TOPIC would correspond
to the first entity in the clause, they are in fact dis-
tinct. Due to issues related to coordination, appos-
itive constructions, and fragments which do not
receive a topology of fields, the first entity in a
clause is labelled the TOPIC only 80.8% of the
time in the corpus. This representation also distin-
guishes NFs, which clausal order does not.
topic+pron refines the above by taking into
account a word order restriction in German that
pronouns appear before full noun phrases in the
MF field. The following set of decisions repre-
sents how a noun phrase is marked: If the first NP
in the clause is a pronoun in an MF field and is the
subject, we mark it as TOPIC. If it is not the sub-
ject, we mark it as NONTOPIC. For other NPs, we
follow the topic representation.
3.3 Automatic annotations
While it is reasonable to assume perfect annota-
tions of topological fields and grammatical roles in
many NLG contexts, this assumption may be less
appropriate in other applications involving text-to-
text generation where the input to the system is
text such as paraphrasing or machine translation.
Thus, we test the robustness of the entity repre-
190
Representation Manual Automatic
topf/pp 94.44 94.89
topic 94.13 94.53
topic+pron 94.08 94.51
topf 93.87 93.11
subj/obj 93.831 91.7++
cases 93.312 90.93++
order 1/2+ 92.51++ 92.1+
subj/obj?vf 92.32++ 90.74++
default 91.42++ 91.42++
vfpp 91.37++ 91.68++
vf 91.21++ 91.16++
order 1/2/3+ 91.16++ 90.71++
Table 2: Accuracy (%) of the permutation de-
tection experiment with various entity represen-
tations using manual and automatic annotations
of topological fields and grammatical roles. The
baseline without any additional annotation is un-
derlined. Two-tailed sign tests were calculated for
each result against the best performing model in
each column (1: p = 0.101; 2: p = 0.053; +: statis-
tically significant, p < 0.05; ++: very statistically
significant, p < 0.01 ).
sentations to automatic extraction in the absence
of manual annotations. We employ the following
two systems for extracting topological fields and
grammatical roles.
To parse topological fields, we use the Berke-
ley parser of Petrov and Klein (2007), which has
been shown to perform well at this task (Cheung
and Penn, 2009). The parser is trained on sections
of Tu?Ba-D/Z which do not overlap with the sec-
tion from which the documents for this experiment
were drawn, and obtains an overall parsing per-
formance of 93.35% F1 on topological fields and
clausal nodes without gold POS tags on the section
of Tu?Ba-D/Z it was tested on.
We tried two methods to obtain grammatical
roles. First, we tried extracting grammatical roles
from the parse trees which we obtained from the
Berkeley parser, as this information is present in
the edge labels that can be recovered from the
parse. However, we found that we achieved bet-
ter accuracy by using RFTagger (Schmid and
Laws, 2008), which tags nouns with their morpho-
logical case. Morphological case is distinct from
grammatical role, as noun phrases can function as
adjuncts in possessive constructions and preposi-
Annotation Accuracy (%)
Grammatical role 83.6
Topological field (+PP) 93.8
Topological field (?PP) 95.7
Clausal order 90.8
Table 3: Accuracy of automatic annotations of
noun phrases with coreferents. +PP means that
prepositional objects are treated as a separate cate-
gory from topological fields. ?PP means they are
treated as other noun phrases.
tional phrases. However, we can approximate the
grammatical role of an entity using the morpho-
logical case. We follow the annotation conven-
tions of Tu?Ba-D/Z in not assigning a grammati-
cal role when the noun phrase is a prepositional
object. We also do not assign a grammatical role
when the noun phrase is in the genitive case, as
genitive objects are very rare in German and are
far outnumbered by the possessive genitive con-
struction.
3.4 Results
Table 2 shows the results of the sentence ordering
permutation detection experiment. The top four
performing entity representations are all topologi-
cal field-based, and they outperform grammatical
role-based and simple clausal order-based mod-
els. These results indicate that the information
that topological fields provide about clause struc-
ture, appositives, right dislocation, etc. which is
not captured by simple clausal order is important
for coherence modelling. The representations in-
corporating linguistics-based heuristics do not out-
perform purely topological field-based models.
Surprisingly, the VF-based models fare quite
poorly, performing worse than not adding any an-
notations, despite the fact that topological field-
based models in general perform well. This result
may be a result of the heterogeneous uses of the
VF.
The automatic topological field annotations are
more accurate than the automatic grammatical role
annotations (Table 3), which may partly explain
why grammatical role-based models suffer more
when using automatic annotations. Note, how-
ever, that the models based on automatic topolog-
ical field annotations outperform even the gram-
matical role-based models using manual annota-
tion (at marginal significance, p < 0.1). The topo-
191
logical field annotations are accurate enough that
automatic annotations produce no decrease in per-
formance.
These results show the upper bound of entity-
based local coherence modelling with perfect
coreference information. The results we obtain
are higher than the results for the English cor-
pora of Barzilay and Lapata (2008) (87.2% on the
Earthquakes corpus and 90.4% on the Accidents
corpus), but this is probably due to corpus differ-
ences as well as the availability of perfect corefer-
ence information in our experiments1.
Due to the high performance we obtained, we
calculated Kendall tau coefficients (Lapata, 2006)
over the sentence orderings of the cases in which
our best performing model is incorrect, to deter-
mine whether the remaining errors are instances
where the permuted ordering is nearly identical to
the original ordering. We obtained a ? of 0.0456
in these cases, compared to a ? of ?0.0084 for all
the pairs, indicating that this is not the case.
To facilitate comparison to the results of Filip-
pova and Strube (2007a), we rerun this experiment
on the same subsections of the corpus as in that
work for training and testing. The first 100 arti-
cles of Tu?Ba-D/Z are used for testing, while the
next 200 are used for training and development.
Unlike the previous experiments, we do not do
parameter tuning on this set of data. Instead, we
follow Filippova and Strube (2007a) in using tran-
sition lengths of up to three. We do not put in
a salience threshold. We see that our results are
much better than the ones reported in that work,
even for the default representation. The main
reason for this discrepancy is probably the way
that entities are created from the corpus. In our
experiments, we create an entity for every single
noun phrase node that we encounter, then merge
the entities that are linked by coreference. Filip-
pova and Strube (2007a) convert the annotations
of Tu?Ba-D/Z into a dependency format, then ex-
tract entities from the noun phrases found there.
They may thus annotate fewer entities, as there
1Barzilay and Lapata (2008) use the coreference sys-
tem of Ng and Cardie (2002) to obtain coreference anno-
tations. We are not aware of similarly well-tested, pub-
licly available coreference resolution systems that handle all
types of anaphora for German. We considered adapting the
BART coreference resolution toolkit (Versley et al, 2008) to
German, but a number of language-dependent decisions re-
garding preprocessing, feature engineering, and the learning
paradigm would need to be made in order to achieve rea-
sonable performance comparable to state-of-the-art English
coreference resolution systems.
Representation Accuracy (%)
topf/pp 93.83
topic 93.31
topic+pron 93.31
topf 92.49
subj/obj 88.99
order 1/2+ 88.89
order 1/2/3+ 88.84
cases 88.63
vf 87.60
vfpp 88.17
default 87.55
subj/obj?vf 87.71
(Filippova and Strube, 2007) 75
Table 4: Accuracy (%) of permutation detection
experiment with various entity representations us-
ing manual and automatic annotations of topolog-
ical fields and grammatical roles on subset of cor-
pus used by Filippova and Strube (2007a).
may be nested NP nodes in the original corpus.
There may also be noise in the dependency con-
version process.
The relative rankings of different entity repre-
sentations in this experiment are similar to the
rankings of the previous experiment, with topolog-
ical field-based models outperforming grammati-
cal role and clausal order models.
4 Local Coherence for Natural Language
Generation
One of the motivations of the entity grid-based
model is to improve surface realization decisions
in NLG systems. A typical experimental design
would pass the contents of the test section of a
corpus as input to the NLG system with the order-
ing information stripped away. The task is then to
regenerate the ordering of the information found
in the original corpus. Various coherence models
have been tested in corpus-based NLG settings.
For example, Karamanis et al (2009) compare
several versions of Centering Theory-based met-
rics of coherence on corpora by examining how
highly the original ordering found in the corpus
is ranked compared to other possible orderings of
propositions. A metric performs well if it ranks
the original ordering better than the alternative or-
derings.
In our next experiment, we incorporate local co-
192
herence information into the system of Filippova
and Strube (2007b). We embed entity topologi-
cal field transitions into their probabilistic model,
and show that the added coherence component
slightly improves the performance of the baseline
NLG system in generating constituent orderings in
a German corpus, though not to a statistically sig-
nificant degree.
4.1 Method
We use the WikiBiography corpus2 for our exper-
iments. The corpus consists of more than 1100 bi-
ographies taken from the German Wikipedia, and
contains automatic annotations of morphological,
syntactic, and semantic information. Each article
also contains the coreference chain of the subject
of the biography (the biographee). The first 100
articles are used for testing, the next 200 for de-
velopment, and the rest for training.
The baseline generation system already incor-
porates topological field information into the con-
stituent ordering process. The system operates in
two steps. First, in main clauses, one constituent
is selected as the Vorfeld (VF). This is done us-
ing a maximum entropy model (call it MAXENT).
Then, the remaining constituents are ordered using
a second maximum entropy model (MAXENT2).
Significantly, Filippova and Strube (2007b) found
that selecting the VF first, and then ordering the
remaining constituents results in a 9% absolute
improvement over the corresponding model where
the selection is performed in one step by the sort-
ing algorithm alone.
The maximum entropy model for both steps rely
on the following features:
? features on the voice, valency, and identity of
the main verb of the clause
? features on the morphological and syntactic
status of the constituent to be ordered
? whether the constituent occurs in the preced-
ing sentence
? features for whether the constituent contains
a determiner, an anaphoric pronoun, or a rel-
ative clause
? the size of the constituent in number of mod-
ifiers, in depth, and in number of words
2http://www.eml-research.de/english/
research/nlp/download/wikibiography.php
? the semantic class of the constituent (per-
son, temporal, location, etc.) The biographee,
in particular, is marked by its own semantic
class.
In the first VF selection step, MAXENT simply
produces a probability of each constituent being a
VF, and the constituent with the highest probabil-
ity is selected. In the second step, MAXENT2 takes
the featural representation of two constituents, and
produces an output probability of the first con-
stituent preceding the second constituent. The fi-
nal ordering is achieved by first randomizing the
order of the constituents in a clause (besides the
first one, which is selected to be the VF), then
sorting them according to the precedence proba-
bilities. Specifically, a constituent A is put before
a constituent B if MAXENT2(A,B) > 0.5. Because
this precedence relation is not antisymmetric (i.e.,
MAXENT2(A,B) > 0.5 and MAXENT2(B,A) >
0.5 may be simultaneously true or simultaneously
false), different initializations of the order pro-
duce different sorted results. In our experiments,
we correct this by defining the precedence rela-
tion to be A precedes B iff MAXENT2(A,B) >
MAXENT2(B,A). This change does not greatly im-
pact the performance, and removes the random-
ized element of the algorithm.
The baseline system does not directly model the
context when ordering constituents. All of the
features but one in the original maximum entropy
models rely on local properties of the clause. We
incorporate local coherence information into the
model by adding entity transition features which
we found to be useful in the sentence ordering ex-
periment in Section 3 above.
Specifically, we add features indicating the
topological fields in which entities occur in the
previous sentences. We found that looking back
up to two sentences produces the best results (by
tuning on the development set). Because this cor-
pus does not come with general coreference in-
formation except for the coreference chain of the
biographee, we use the semantic classes instead.
So, all constituents in the same semantic class are
treated as one coreference chain. An example of a
feature may be biog-last2, which takes on a value
such as ?v??, meaning that this constituent refers
to the biographee, and the biographee occurs in
the VF two clauses ago (v), but does not appear in
the previous clause (?). For a constituent which is
not the biographee, this feature would be marked
193
Method VF Acc (%) Acc (%) Tau
Baseline 68.7 60.9 0.72
+Coherence 69.2 61.5 0.72
Table 5: Results of adding coherence features into
a natural language generation system. VF Acc%
is the accuracy of selecting the first constituent in
main clauses. Acc % is the percentage of per-
fectly ordered clauses, tau is Kendall?s ? on the
constituent ordering. The test set contains 2246
clauses, of which 1662 are main clauses.
?na? (not applicable).
4.2 Results
Table 5 shows the results of adding these contex-
tual features into the maximum entropy models.
We see that we obtain a small improvement in the
accuracy of VF selection, and in the accuracy of
correctly ordering the entire clause. These im-
provements are not statistically significant by Mc-
Nemar?s test. We suggest that the lack of coref-
erence information for all entities in the article
may have reduced the benefit of the coherence
component. Also, the topline of performance is
substantially lower than 100%, as multiple order-
ings are possible and equally valid. Human judge-
ments on information structuring for both inter-
and intra-sentential units are known to have low
agreement (Barzilay et al, 2002; Filippova and
Strube, 2007c; Lapata, 2003; Chen et al, 2007).
Thus, the relative error reduction is higher than the
absolute reduction might suggest.
5 Conclusions
We have shown that topological fields are a use-
ful source of information for local coherence mod-
elling. In a sentence-order permutation detection
task, models which use topological field infor-
mation outperform both grammatical role-based
models and models based on simple clausal or-
der, with the best performing model achieving a
relative error reduction of 40.4% over the original
baseline without any additional annotation. Ap-
plying our local coherence model in another set-
ting, we have embedded topological field transi-
tions of entities into an NLG system which orders
constituents in German clauses. We find that the
coherence-enhanced model slightly outperforms
the baseline system, but this was not statistically
significant.
We suggest that the utility of topological fields
in local coherence modelling comes from the in-
teraction between word order and information
structure in freer-word-order languages. Crucially,
topological fields take into account issues such
as coordination, appositives, sentential fragments
and differences in clause types, which word or-
der alone does not. They are also shallow enough
to be accurately parsed automatically for use in
resource-poor applications.
Further refinement of the topological field an-
notations to take advantage of the fact that they
do not correspond neatly to any single information
status such as topic or focus could provide addi-
tional performance gains. The model also shows
promise for other discourse-related tasks such as
coreference resolution and discourse parsing.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Katja Filippova for providing us
with source code for the experiments in Section 4
and for answering related questions, and to Tim-
othy Fowler for useful discussions and comments
on a draft of the paper. This work is supported in
part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re-
search Council of Canada.
References
R. Barzilay and M. Lapata. 2008. Modeling local co-
herence: An entity-based approach. Computational
Linguistics, 34(1):1?34.
R. Barzilay and L. Lee. 2004. Catching the drift: Prob-
abilistic content models, with applications to gen-
eration and summarization. In Proc. HLT-NAACL
2004, pages 113?120.
R. Barzilay, N. Elhadad, and K. McKeown. 2002. In-
ferring strategies for sentence ordering in multidoc-
ument news summarization. Journal of Artificial In-
telligence Research, 17:35?55.
E. Chen, B. Snyder, and R. Barzilay. 2007. Incremen-
tal text structuring with online hierarchical ranking.
In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 83?91.
J.C.K. Cheung and G. Penn. 2009. Topological Field
Parsing of German. In Proc. 47th ACL and 4th IJC-
NLP, pages 64?72. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
S. Dipper and H. Zinsmeister. 2009. The Role of
the German Vorfeld for Local Coherence: A Pi-
lot Study. In Proceedings of the Conference of the
German Society for Computational Linguistics and
Language Technology (GSCL), pages 69?79. Gunter
Narr.
194
M. Elsner and E. Charniak. 2007. A generative
discourse-new model for text coherence. Technical
report, Technical Report CS-07-04, Brown Univer-
sity.
K. Filippova and M. Strube. 2007a. Extending the
entity-grid coherence model to semantically related
entities. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
139?142. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
K. Filippova and M. Strube. 2007b. Generating con-
stituent order in German clauses. In Proc. 45th ACL,
pages 320?327.
K. Filippova and M. Strube. 2007c. The German Vor-
feld and Local Coherence. Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information, 16(4):465?485.
T.N. Ho?hle. 1983. Topologische Felder. Ph.D. thesis,
Ko?ln.
J. Jacobs. 2001. The dimensions of topiccomment.
Linguistics, 39(4):641?681.
T. Joachims. 2002. Learning to Classify Text Using
Support Vector Machines. Kluwer.
N. Karamanis, C. Mellish, M. Poesio, and J. Oberlan-
der. 2009. Evaluating centering for information or-
dering using corpora. Computational Linguistics,
35(1):29?46.
R. Kibble and R. Power. 2004. Optimizing referential
coherence in text generation. Computational Lin-
guistics, 30(4):401?416.
M. Lapata. 2003. Probabilistic text structuring: Exper-
iments with sentence ordering. In Proc. 41st ACL,
pages 545?552.
M. Lapata. 2006. Automatic evaluation of information
ordering: Kendall?s tau. Computational Linguistics,
32(4):471?484.
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving machine learn-
ing approaches to coreference resolution. In Proc.
40th ACL, pages 104?111.
S. Petrov and D. Klein. 2007. Improved inference
for unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of NAACL
HLT 2007, pages 404?411.
M. Poesio, R. Stevenson, B.D. Eugenio, and J. Hitze-
man. 2004. Centering: A parametric theory
and its instantiations. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):309?363.
H. Schmid and F. Laws. 2008. Estimation of condi-
tional probabilities with decision trees and an appli-
cation to fine-grained POS tagging. In Proc. 22nd
COLING, pages 777?784. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
P. Sgall, E. Hajic?ova?, J. Panevova?, and J. Mey. 1986.
The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and
pragmatic aspects. Springer.
M. Strube and U. Hahn. 1999. Functional center-
ing: Grounding referential coherence in information
structure. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309?
344.
H. Telljohann, E. Hinrichs, and S. Kubler. 2004.
The Tu?Ba-D/Z treebank: Annotating German with
a context-free backbone. In Proc. Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2004), pages 2229?2235.
Y. Versley, S.P. Ponzetto, M. Poesio, V. Eidelman,
A. Jern, J. Smith, X. Yang, and A. Moschitti. 2008.
BART: A modular toolkit for coreference resolution.
In Proc. 46th ACL-HLT Demo Session, pages 9?12.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
195
