Yugoslavia must cooperate with the U.N. war crimes tribunal investigating alleged atrocities during the wars in Croatia and Bosnia, international legal experts meeting in Belgrade said Sunday.
The president of the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal harshly criticized Belgrade authorities anew for refusing to let U.N. investigators probe alleged atrocities in Kosovo.
The Yugoslav war crimes tribunal Monday acquitted a Muslim military commander of war crimes against Bosnian Serb prisoners in 1992, but convicted three underlings in the first U.N. case dealing with anti-Serb atrocities.
The Yugoslav war crimes tribunal Monday acquitted a Muslim commander of war crimes against Bosnian Serb prisoners in 1992, but convicted three underlings in the first U.N. case dealing with anti-Serb atrocities.
In its first case to deal with atrocities against Serbs during Bosnia's civil war, a U.N. war crimes tribunal on Monday convicted three prison officials and guards, but acquitted a top military commander who oversaw the facility.
Hundreds of people gathered at Sarajevo airport on Saturday to welcome Zejnil Delalic, who was cleared of war crimes charges earlier this week after spending 980 days in jail of the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
He called himself the Serb Adolf, and his crimes were as chilling as his nickname.
To his Muslim targets, Bosnian Serb Goran Jelisic was the face of genocide who once bragged that he had to kill 20 or 30 Muslims before his morning coffee.
Some of the closest combat in the half year of the Kosovo conflict, to the point of fighting room to room and floor to floor, occurred near this village six weeks ago, in the days before 21 women, children and elderly members of the Delijaj clan were massacred by Serbian forces, their mutilated bodies left strewn on the forest floor.
American and allied forces in Bosnia on Wednesday arrested a Bosnian Serb general who was charged with genocide by the international war crimes tribunal in a recent secret indictment.
