MUNICH, Germany( AP) U.S. prosecutors have asked for a 20-day extension to provide Germany with paperwork necessary to extradite a top lieutenant of Saudi terrorist suspect Osama bin Laden, officials said Saturday.
The Taliban's chief justice accused the United States on Wednesday of looking for an excuse to launch another missile attack on his war-shattered homeland.
NAIROBI, Kenya( AP) FBI agents this week began questioning relatives of the victims of the Aug. 7 U.S. Embassy bombing as well as the seriously injured on request of the U.S. Attorney's office for the Southern District of New York, a U.S. official said Thursday.
Police arrested two journalists and charged them with writing articles to encourage Muslim youths to stage an Islamic revolution in Bangladesh after the Taliban model in Afghanistan, a police officer said Thursday.
The man accused of orchestrating the U.S. embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya was declared a free man Friday in Afghanistan, where he has lived for years with the permission of the hard-line Islamic Taliban militia.
Albania says it has uncovered a terrorist network operated by Osama Bin Laden, the Islamic fundamentalist accused of masterminding the August embassy bombings in Africa, and that it's members have infiltrated other parts of Europe, The Sunday Times reported.
The United States has obtained new evidence to link the owner of a Sudanese factory destroyed in a U.S. cruise missile strike last month to a terrorist group backed by Osama bin Laden, the suspected mastermind of the bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa, according to U.S. intelligence officials.
One of the clear but unstated objectives of last August's raid on Afghanistan was to kill Osama bin Laden and as many of his lieutenants as possible, administration officials now acknowledge.
Sometime in the summer of 1997, an operative for Osama bin Laden sat down at his personal computer in a hideaway in Kenya.
If Osama bin Laden ever stands trial in New York for the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Africa and other acts of terror, it is already clear who prosecutors will call as a chief witness : One of his senior aides who has been talking to U.S. investigators for two years.
