Hours before China was expected to sign a key U.N. human rights treaty and host British Prime Minister Tony Blair, police hauled a prominent human rights campaigner in for questioning Monday.
China released a respected, but ailing labor rights campaigner from a prison work camp Sunday and immediately sent him into exile in the United States.
Trying to deflect foreign criticism of a crackdown on democracy campaigners, China sent a respected labor rights activist from jail into U.S. exile Sunday even as it prepared to put a prominent dissident on trial.
In stern judgments capping a decisive crackdown on dissidents, Chinese courts sentenced two prominent democracy campaigners to 13 and 11 years in prison Monday for trying to organize an opposition political party.
German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer, who drew China's anger recently by meeting with exiled dissident Wei Jingsheng, said China's sentencing of two dissidents Monday was unacceptable and flouted an international treaty the country recently signed.
German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer, who drew China's anger recently by meeting with exiled dissident Wei Jingsheng, said China's sentencing of two dissidents Monday was unacceptable and flouted an international treaty the country recently signed.
The trials of three outspoken dissidents over, Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin signaled Wednesday that China will sustain a crackdown on dissent throughout next year.
His friend and political mentor is jailed, robbing their budding opposition political party of its most potent organizer, but Zha Jianguo is not afraid.
By sentencing two of the country's most prominent democracy campaigners to long prison terms, China on Monday took its harshest steps yet in its current crackdown on organized political opposition.
Six months after President Clinton traveled to Beijing and challenged China's leaders to move rapidly toward political reform, the administration's policy of engaging Beijing was called into question Monday when Chinese courts sentenced three of the nation's most prominent dissidents to long jail sentences.
