Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 13?17,
Avignon, France, 24 April 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
BAD: An assistant tool for making verses in Basque
Manex Agirrezabal, In?aki Alegria, Bertol Arrieta
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
maguirrezaba008@ikasle.ehu.es, i.alegria@ehu.es, bertol@ehu.es
Mans Hulden
Ikerbasque (Basque Science Foundation)
mhulden@email.arizona.edu
Abstract
We present work on a verse-composition
assistant for composing, checking correct-
ness of, and singing traditional Basque
bertsoak?impromptu verses on particular
themes. A performing bertsolari?a verse
singer in the Basque Country?must ad-
here to strict rules that dictate the format
and content of the verses sung. To help
the aspiring bertsolari, we provide a tool
that includes a web interface that is able
to analyze, correct, provide suggestions and
synonyms, and tentatively also sing (using
text-to-speech synthesis) verses composed
by the user.
1 Introduction
In the Basque Country there exists a long-
standing live performance tradition of improvis-
ing verses?a type of ex tempore composition and
singing called bertsolaritza. Verses in bertsolar-
itza can be seen as discourses with strict rules
governing the technical structure of them: verses
must contain a certain number of lines and each
line must have a defined number of syllables, cer-
tain lines have to rhyme in certain patterns, and so
forth.
In this paper we present a web-based assistant
tool for constructing verses (bertsoak) according
to the rules of bertsolaritza (Garzia et al 2001).
If the reader is interested in this topic, we rec-
ommend watching the 2011 film Bertsolari1 2, di-
rected by Asier Altuna.
1IMDB: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2058583
2Trailer on: http://vimeo.com/9355066
2 Relationship to earlier work
There exist some prior works dealing with Basque
verse-making and computer technologies, such as
BertsolariXa (Arrieta et al, 2001), which is a
rhyme search tool implemented as finite-state au-
tomata using the two-level morphology formal-
ism. The tool also contains other features, includ-
ing semantic categorization of words, narrowing
word-searches to certain themes, etc. While Bert-
solariXa focuses mostly on the word-level, the
current work also includes constraints on over-
all verse structure in its implementation as well
as a synonym search tool, a melody suggestion
system, and possibilities for plugging in text-to-
speech synthesis of verses.
2.1 The Bertsolari tradition
Bertsolaritza is very ingrained in the Basque
Country and championships, competitions and
get-togethers on bertsolaritza are quite common.
Usually the competitors in such event, called bert-
solaris, are given a theme to produce a verse on
under some very limited time constraints.
But the Basque Country is not the only place
that hosts such troubadour traditions?similar
customs are present in many other countries such
as Cuba, Brazil, Argentina, etc. The goal of the
current tool is to be generalizable, and so appli-
cable to various strategies of verse improvisation,
and possibly be useful not only for Basque speak-
ers, but also for others.
Below we briefly present an example of a verse
made in the Basque Country. In 1986 Andoni
Egan?a (a well-known bertsolari) was asked to
sing a bertso and assigned a topic. In the verse,
he was asked to play the role of an old person
who lived alone, and who realized that he could
13
not even tie his shoes. Within a few seconds he
composed and sang three verses. Here, we ana-
lyze the first verse.
Verse:
Gazte aroan ibili arren
gustora tirriki-tarra,
denbora honen joan etorriak
ederki jo dit gitarra,
gorputza daukat ximeldurikan
ta eskuen punta zaharra,
denborarekin seko galdu det
gazte aroko indarra,
ez al da pena gizon mardul bat
hola ibili beharra.
Translation:
Even when I was young
I was always on a spree
over time
I have been punished
I have a crumpled body
and the tip of the hands very old,
Over time I lost
the strength I had when I was young,
It?s a shame that a strong man
has to end up like me.
The special charm of bertsolaritza improvi-
sation is that people proficient in the art can
quickly express a variety of ideas, although they
are working with very restrictive rules concern-
ing the number of syllables in words they use,
and how the words must rhyme. We must take
into account that Andoni Egan?a was able to sing
this verse within a few seconds of being given
the topic, and also, that it complies exactly with
a certain metric. In this case, the verse contains
eight lines, each odd line consisting of ten sylla-
bles, and each even line of eight syllables, with
the even lines rhyming.
Formal training in the bertsolari tradition also
exists in the Basque Country. In the last 20 to
30 years, an important movement has developed
that aims to provide instruction to upcoming gen-
erations on how to create verses (orally or in
writing). This kind of instruction usually takes
place in learning centers called bertso-eskolak,
which in English roughly means, ?verse-making
schools.? The proliferation of this movement has
produced a strong base of young bertsolaris, of
whom many achieve an outstanding level of im-
provisation skills.
3 The BAD tool
BAD is the acronym for ?Bertsotarako Arbel Dig-
itala?, roughly ?Digital verse board.? The aim
of the tool is to serve as a general assistant for
bertsolari-style verse composition and help verse-
making learners in their learning process.
This tool has been developed using the PHP
programming language, but it contains certain
parts developed using finite-state technology. The
main functions of this tool, which will be dis-
cussed in more detail in the next five sections, are
the following: visualization of the verse structure,
structure checking, rhyme and synonym searching
and verse singing.
3.1 Verse structure
The main rules of the bertsolari verse are that a
verse must consist of a certain predefined number
of lines and each line in turn, of a predefined num-
ber of syllables. Traditionally, about a hundred
different schemes are used, and the tool provides
support for all these patterns. For example, the
structure called ?Hamarreko handia? has ten lines
and ten syllables in the odd-numbered lines, and
eight syllables in the even-numbered lines. In this
structure, the even-numbered lines have to rhyme.
Selecting this scheme, the tool will mark the cor-
responding lines with their requirements.
The web interface can be seen in figure 1,
which shows the general layout of the tool, illus-
trated with the example verse referred to above?
we see that each line has been approved in terms
of line length and syllable structure by the tool.
We have designed a database in which the main
verse structures are saved so that when the user se-
lects one verse schema, the system knows exactly
the number of lines it must contain, where must
it rhyme and how many syllables each line should
have. Those schemata are also linked to melodies,
each melody corresponding to one possible struc-
ture.
3.2 Structure checking
After writing the verse, the system can evaluate if
it is technically correct, i.e. if the overall structure
is correct and if each line in the form abides by the
required syllable count and rhyming scheme. The
syllable counter is implemented using the foma
software (Hulden, 2009), and the implementation
(Hulden, 2006) can be found on the homepage of
14
Figure 1: A verse written in the BAD web application.
foma.3
Separately, we have also developed a rhyme
checker, which extracts special patterns in the
lines that must rhyme and checks their confor-
mity.
These patterns are extracted using foma (see
section 3.4) after which some phonological rules
are applied. For example, an example rule era
? {era, eda, ega, eba}, models the fact that any
word ending in era, for example, etxera, will
rhyme with all words that end in era, eda, eba or
ega. These rhyming patterns have been extracted
according to the phonological laws described in
(Amuriza, 1981).
3.3 Synonym search
Usually, people who write verses tend to quickly
exhaust their vocabulary and ideas with to ex-
press what they want to say, or encounter prob-
lems with the number of syllables in various ten-
tative words they have in mind. For example,
if the verse-maker wants to say something con-
taining the word ?family,? (familia in Euskera, a
four-syllable word) but is forced to use a three-
syllable word in a particular context, the inter-
face provides for possibilities to look for three-
syllable synonyms of the word familia, producing
the word sendia? a word whose meaning is oth-
erwise the same, and made up of three syllables.
For developing the synonym search, we used a
modified version of the Basque Wordnet (Pociello
3http://foma.googlecode.com
et al, 2010), originally developed by the IXA
group at the University of the Basque Country.
Within Wordnet we search the synsets for the in-
coming word, and the words that correspond to
those synsets are returned.
3.4 Rhyme search
The classical and most well-known problem in
bertsolaritza concern the rhyming patterns. As
mentioned, various lines within a verse are re-
quired to rhyme, according to certain predefined
schemata. To search for words that rhyme with
other words in a verse, the BAD tool contains a
rhyme search engine. In the interface, this is lo-
cated in the right part of the BAD tool main view,
as seen in figure 2.
The rhyme searcher is built upon finite-state
technology, commonly used for developing mor-
phological and phonological analyzers, and calls
upon the freely available foma-tool, to calculate
matching and nonmatching rhyme schemes.
Its grammar is made up of regular expressions
that are used to identify phonological patterns in
final syllables in the input word. The result of
the search is the intersection of these patterns and
all the words generated from a morphological de-
scription of Basque (Alegria et al, 1996)?that
is, a list of all words that match both the required
phonological constraints given (rhyming) and a
morphological description of Basque.
Based upon figure 2, if we search rhymes for
the word landa (cottage), the system proposes a
15
Figure 2: The response of the rhyme search engine.
set of words that can be filtered depending on the
number of syllables required. Among this list of
words, we can find some words that end in anda,
such as, Irlanda (Ireland) or eztanda (explosion),
but through the application of phonological equiv-
alency rules we also find terms like ganga (vault).
3.5 Singing synthesis
Another characteristic, as mentioned, is that, in
the end, the verses are intended to be sung in-
stead of only being textually represented. Based
on other ongoing work in singing synthesis, we
have designed a system for singing the verses en-
tered into the system in Basque.
This is based on the ?singing mode? of the Fes-
tival text-to-speech system (Taylor et al, 1998).
The advantage of using this is that Festival is
open-source and has given us ample opportunities
to modify its behavior. However, as Festival does
not currently support Basque directly, we have re-
lied on the Spanish support of the Festival sys-
tem.4
4While morphologically and syntactically, Spanish and
Basque have no relationship whatsoever, phonetically the
languages are quite close, with only a few phonemes, syl-
Based on current work by the Aholab research
team in Bilbao?a lab that works on Basque
speech synthesis and recognition?we have im-
plemented a singing module for BAD, based on
the text-to-speech HTS engine (Erro et al, 2010).
Our application is able to sing the composed
verses entered into the system in Basque, with a
choice of various standard melodies for bertsolar-
itza.5
4 Discussion and future work
Now that the BAD tool has been developed, our
intention is to evaluate it. To make a qualita-
tive evaluation we have gotten in touch with some
verse-making schools (bertso-eskola), so that they
can test the system and send us their feedback us-
ing a form. Once the evaluation is made, we will
improve it according to the feedback and the sys-
tem will be made public.
Our ultimate goal is to develop a system able to
create verses automatically. To achieve this long-
term goal, there is plenty of work to do and ba-
sic research to be done. We have in our hands a
good corpus of 3,500 Basque verse transcriptions,
so we intend to study these verses from a mor-
phological, syntactical, semantical and pragmatic
point of view.
In the short term, we also plan to expand the
synonym search to be able to provide searches
for semantically related words and subjects (and
not just synonyms), like hypernyms or hyponyms.
The Basque WordNet provides a good opportu-
nity for this, as one is easily able to traverse the
WordNet to encounter words with varying degrees
of semantic similarity.
Another feature that we want to develop is a
system that receives as input a verse together with
a MIDI file, and where the system automatically
sings the verse to the music provided.
Finally, in order for the system to be
able to provide better proposals for the verse
artist?including perhaps humorous and creative
proposals?we intend to work with approaches
to computational creativity. We are considering
different approaches to this topic, such as in the
work on Hahacronym (Stock et al, 2005) or the
Standup riddle builder (Ritchie et al, 2001).
labification rules, and stress rules being different enough to
disturb the system?s behavior.
5However, this functionality is not available on the web
interface as of yet.
16
Figure 3: The BAD application before entering a verse, showing two possible rhyme patterns.
Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the
Basque Government (Research Groups, IT344-
10).
References
In?aki Alegria, Xabier Artola, Kepa Sarasola and
Miriam Urkia, ?Automatic morphological analysis
of Basque?, Literary and Linguistic Computing,
ALLC, 1996
Xabier Amuriza, ?Hiztegi errimatua?, Alfabetatze Eu-
skalduntze Koordinakundea, 1981
Bertol Arrieta, In?aki Alegria, Xabier Arregi, ?An as-
sistant tool for Verse-Making in Basque based on
Two-Level Morphology?, 2001
Daniel Erro, In?aki Sainz, Ibon Saratxaga, Eva Navas,
Inma Herna?ez, ?MFCC+F0 Extraction and Wave-
form Reconstruction using HNM: Preliminary Re-
sults in an HMM-based Synthesizer?, 2010
Joxerra Garzia, Jon Sarasua, and Andoni Egan?a,
?The art of bertsolaritza: improvised Basque verse
singing?, Bertsolari liburuak, 2001
John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, Jeffrey D. Ullman,
?Introduccio?n a la teor??a de Auto?matas, Lenguajes
y Computacio?n?, Pearson educacio?n, 2002
Mans Hulden, ?Foma: a finite-state compiler and li-
brary?, Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Demonstrations Session, p. 29?
32, 2009
Mans Hulden, ?Finite-state syllabification?, Finite-
State Methods and Natural Language Processing, p.
86 ? 96, Springer, 2006
Kimmo Koskenniemi. ?Two-level morphology: A
general computational model for word-form recog-
nition and production?. Publication 11, University
of Helsinki, Department of General Linguistics,
Helsinki, 1983.
Eli Pociello, Eneko Agirre, Izaskun Aldezabal,
?Methodology and construction of the Basque
WordNet?, 2010
Graeme Ritchie, ?Current directions in computational
humour?, Artificial Intelligence Review, Volume
16, Number 2, p. 119 ? 135, Springer, 2001
Graeme Ritchie, Ruli Manurung, Helen Pain, Annalu
Waller, Dave O?Mara, ?The STANDUP interactive
riddle builder?, Volume 2, Number 2, p. 67 ? 69,
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2006
Oliviero Stock and Carlo Strapparava, ?Hahacronym:
A computational humor system?, Proceedings of
the ACL 2005 on Interactive poster and demonstra-
tion sessions, p. 113 ? 116, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 2005
Paul Taylor, Alan W. Black and Richard Caley, ?The
architecture of the Festival speech synthesis sys-
tem?, International Speech Communication Asso-
ciation, 1998
17
