A Program For Aligning Sentences In Bilingual Corpora
Researchers in both machine translation (e.g., Brown et al. 1990) and bilingual lexicography (e.g., Klavans and Tzoukermann 1990) have recently become interested in studying bilingual corpora, bodies of text such as the Canadian Hansards (parliamentary proceedings), which are available in multiple languages (such as French and English).
One useful step is to align the sentences, that is, to identify correspondences between sentences in one language and sentences in the other language.
This paper will describe a method and a program (align) for aligning sentences based on a simple statistical model of character lengths.
The program uses the fact that longer sentences in one language tend to be translated into longer sentences in the other language, and that shorter sentences tend to be translated into shorter sentences.
A probabilistic score is assigned to each proposed correspondence of sen tences, based on the scaled difference of lengths of the two sentences (in characters) and the variance of this difference.
This probabilistic score is used in a dynamic programming framework to find the maximum likelihood alignment of sentences.
It is remarkable that such a simple approach works as well as it does.
An evaluation was performed based on a trilingual corpus of economic reports issued by the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) in English, French, and German.
The method correctly aligned all but 4% of the sentences.
Moreover, it is possible to extract a large subcorpus that has a much smaller error rate.
By selecting the best-scoring 80% of the alignments, the error rate is reduced from 4% to 0.7%.
There were more errors on the English-French subcorpus than on the English-German subcorpus, showing that error rates will depend on the corpus considered; however, both were small enough to hope that the method will be useful for many language pairs.
To further research on bilingual corpora, a much larger sample of Canadian Hansards (approximately 90 million words, half in English and and half in French) has been aligned with the align program and will be available through the Data Collection Initiative of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL/DCI).
In addition, in order to facilitate replication of the align program, an appendix is provided with detailed c-code of the more difficult core of the align program.
We present a hybrid approach, and the basic hypothesis is that longer sentences in one language tend to be translated into longer sentences in the other language, and shorter sentences tend to be translated into shorter sentences.
We propose a dynamic programming algorithm for the sentence-level alignment of translations that exploited two facts: the length of translated sentences roughly corresponds to the length of the original sentences and the sequence of sentences in translated text largely corresponds to the original order of sentences.
