Subword-based Tagging by Conditional Random Fields for Chinese Word Segmentation We proposed two approaches to improve Chinese word segmentation: a subword-based tagging and a confidence measure approach. We found the former achieved better performance than the existing character-based tagging, and the latter improved segmentation further by combining the former with a dictionary-based segmentation. In addition, the latter can be used to balance out-of-vocabulary rates and in-vocabulary rates. In this work we propose a subword-based IOB tagging, which assigns tags to a predefined lexicon subset consisting of the most frequent multiple-character words in addition to single Chinese characters. It is composed of three parts: a dictionary-based N-gram word segmentation for segmenting IV words, a subword- based tagging by the CRF for recognizing OOVs, and a confidence-dependent word segmentation used for merging the results of both the dictionary-based and the IOB tagging. For a character-based IOB tagger, there is only one possibility of re-segmentation. We define a confidence measure, C M(tiob |w), to measure the confidence of the results produced by the IOB tagging by using the results from the dictionary-based segmentation. The confidence measure comes from two sources: IOB tagging and dictionary- based word segmentation. A confidence measure threshold, t, was defined for making a decision based on the value. If the value was lower than t, the IOB tag was rejected and the dictionary-based segmentation was used; otherwise, the IOB tagging segmentation was used. We used the data provided by Sighan Bakeoff 2005 to test our approaches described in the previous sections. For the dictionary-based approach, we extracted a word list from the training data as the vocabulary. Comparing Table 1 and 2, we found the CRF-modeled IOB tagging yielded better segmentation than the dictionary- based approach. However, the R-iv rates were getting worse in return for higher R-oov rates. In this work, we proposed a subword-based IOB tagging method for Chinese word segmentation. 