Investigating regular sense extensions based on intersective Levin classes Current approaches to English classifica­ tion, Levin classes and WordNet, have limita­ tions in their applicability that impede their utility as general classification schemes. We present a refinement of Levin classes, intersecÂ­ tive sets, which are a more fine-grained clasÂ­ sification and have more coherent sets of synÂ­ tactic frames and associated semantic compoÂ­ nents. Two current approaches to English verb classiÂ­ fications are WordNet (Miller et al., 1990) and Levin classes (Levin, 1993). The fundamental assumption is that the syntactic frames are a direct reflection of the un­ derlying semantics. 2.1 Ambiguities in Levin classes. However, it would be useful for the WordNet senses to have access to the detailed syntactic information that the Levin classes contain, and it would be equally useful to have more guidance as to when membership in a Levin class does in fact indicate shared seman­ tic components. We augmented the existing database of Levin semantic classes with a set of intersective classes, which were created by grouping to­ gether subsets of existing classes with over­ lapping members. A verb was assigned membership in an intersective class if it was listed in each of the existing classes that were combined to form the new intersective class. Some of the large Levin classes comprise verbs that exhibit a wide range of possible semantic components, and could be divided into smaller subclasses. The ad­ junction of the apart adverb adds a change of state semantic component with respect to the object which is not present otherwise. The carry verbs that are not in the intersective class (carry, drag, haul, heft, hoist, lug, tote, tow) are more &quot;pure&quot; examples of the carry class and always imply the achievement of causation of motion. Intersective Levin sets partition these classes according to more coÂ­ herent subsets of features (force, force+motion, force+separation), in effect highlighting a lattice of semantic features that determine the sense of a verb. First, since our experi­ ment was based on a translation from English to Portuguese 