A Class-Based Agreement Model for
Generating Accurately Inflected Translations




Spence Green
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
spenceg@stanford.edu


John DeNero Google 
denero@google.com







Abstract


(1)	 ._}...-ll


       . 



When automatically translating from a weakly 
inflected source language like English to a tar- 
get language with richer grammatical features 
such as gender  and dual number, the output 
commonly contains morpho-syntactic agree- 
ment errors. To address this issue, we present 
a target-side, class-based agreement  model. 
Agreement is promoted by scoring a sequence 
of fine-grained morpho-syntactic classes that 
are predicted during decoding for each transla- 
tion hypothesis. For English-to-Arabic transla- 
tion, our model yields a +1.04 BLEU average 
improvement over a state-of-the-art baseline. 
The model does not require bitext or phrase ta- 
ble annotations and can be easily implemented 
as a feature in many phrase-based decoders.


1    Introduction

Languages vary in the degree to which surface forms 
reflect grammatical relations. English is a weakly in- 
flected language: it has a narrow verbal paradigm, re- 
stricted nominal inflection (plurals), and only the ves- 
tiges of a case system. Consequently,  translation  into 
English—which accounts for much of the machine 
translation (MT) literature (Lopez, 2008)—often in- 
volves some amount of morpho-syntactic dimension- 
ality reduction.  Less attention has been paid to what 
happens during translation from English: richer gram- 
matical features such as gender,  dual number, and 
overt case are effectively latent variables that must 
be inferred during decoding. Consider the output of 
Google Translate for the simple English sentence in 
Fig. 1. The correct translation  is a monotone mapping 
of the input. However, in Arabic, SVO word order 
requires both gender and number agreement between
the subject  ._}...-ll ‘the car’ and verb       . ‘go’. The
MT system selects the correct verb stem, but with
masculine inflection. Although the translation  has


the-carsg.def.fem   gosg.masc with-speedsg.fem
The car goes quickly

Figure 1: Ungrammatical Arabic output of Google Trans- 
late for the English input The car goes quickly. The subject 
should agree with the verb in both gender and number, but 
the verb has masculine inflection. For clarity, the Arabic 
tokens are arranged left-to-right.


the correct semantics, it is ultimately ungrammatical. 
This paper addresses the problem  of generating text 
that conforms to morpho-syntactic  agreement rules.
  Agreement relations that cross statistical phrase 
boundaries are not explicitly modeled in most phrase- 
based MT systems (Avramidis and Koehn, 2008). 
We  address this shortcoming with an agreement 
model that scores sequences of fine-grained morpho- 
syntactic classes. First, bound morphemes in transla- 
tion hypotheses are segmented. Next, the segments 
are labeled with classes that encode both syntactic 
category information (i.e., parts of speech) and gram- 
matical features such as number and gender. Finally, 
agreement is promoted by scoring the predicted class 
sequences with a generative  Markov model.
  Our model scores hypotheses during  decoding.  Un- 
like previous models for scoring syntactic relations, 
our model does not require bitext annotations, phrase 
table features, or decoder modifications.  The model 
can be implemented using the feature APIs of popular 
phrase-based decoders such as Moses (Koehn et al.,
2007) and Phrasal (Cer et al., 2010).
  Intuition might suggest that the standard n-gram 
language model (LM) is sufficient to handle agree- 
ment phenomena. However, LM statistics are sparse, 
and they are made sparser by morphological varia- 
tion. For English-to-Arabic translation, we achieve 
a +1.04 BLEU average improvement  by tiling our 
model on top of a large LM.




146


Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 146–155, 
Jeju, Republic of Korea, 8-14 July 2012. Qc 2012 Association for Computational Linguistics


  It has also been suggested that this setting requires 
morphological generation because the bitext may not


Pron+Fem+Sg 	Verb+Masc+3+Pl 	Prt 	Conj


contain all inflected variants (Minkov et al., 2007; 
Toutanova et al., 2008; Fraser et al., 2012). However,
using lexical coverage experiments, we show that         it
there is ample room for translation quality improve- 
ments through better selection of forms that already 
exist in the translation model.




      

they write




          


 

will


 

and





2    A Class-based Model of Agreement

2.1    Morpho-syntactic Agreement

Morpho-syntactic agreement refers to a relationship 
between two sentence elements a and b that must 
have at least one matching grammatical feature.1
Agreement relations tend to be defined for partic- 
ular syntactic configurations such as verb-subject, 
noun-adjective, and pronoun-antecedent.  In some 
languages, agreement affects the surface forms of the 
words. For example, from the perspective of gener- 
ative grammatical theory, the lexicon entry for the
Arabic nominal ._}...-ll ‘the car’ contains a feminine
gender feature. When this nominal  appears in the sub-
ject argument position, the verb-subject agreement 
relationship triggers feminine inflection of the verb.
  Our model treats agreement   as a  sequence  of 
scored, pairwise relations between adjacent words. 
Of course, this assumption excludes some agreement 
phenomena, but it is sufficient for many common 
cases. We focus on English-Arabic translation as 
an example of a translation  direction that expresses 
substantially more morphological information in the 
target. These relations are best captured in a target- 
side model because they are mostly unobserved (from 
lexical clues) in the English source.
  The agreement model scores sequences of morpho- 
syntactic word classes, which express grammatical 
features relevant to agreement. The model has three 
components:  a segmenter, a tagger, and a scorer.

2.2    Morphological Segmentation

Segmentation is a procedure  for converting raw sur- 
face forms to component morphemes. In some lan- 
guages, agreement  relations exist between bound 
morphemes, which are syntactically  independent yet 
phonologically dependent morphemes. For example,

1 We use morpho-syntactic  and grammatical agreement inter-



Figure 2: Segmentation and tagging of the Arabic token
};._....S:...�_, ‘and they will write it’. This token has four seg-
ments with conflicting grammatical features. For example,
the number feature is singular for the pronominal object 
and plural for the verb. Our model segments the raw to- 
ken, tags each segment with a morpho-syntactic class (e.g., 
“Pron+Fem+Sg”), and then scores the class sequences.


the single raw token in Fig. 2 contains at least four 
grammatically independent morphemes. Because the 
morphemes bear conflicting grammatical features and 
basic parts of speech (POS), we need to segment the 
token before we can evaluate agreement relations.2
  Segmentation is typically applied  as a bitext pre- 
processing step, and there is a rich literature on the 
effect of different segmentation schemata on transla- 
tion quality (Koehn and Knight, 2003; Habash and 
Sadat, 2006; El Kholy and Habash, 2012). Unlike pre- 
vious work, we segment each translation hypothesis 
as it is generated (i.e., during decoding).  This permits 
greater modeling flexibility.  For example, it may be 
useful to count tokens with bound morphemes  as a 
unit during phrase extraction, but to score segmented 
morphemes separately for agreement.
  We treat segmentation  as a character-level   se- 
quence modeling problem and train a linear-chain 
conditional random field (CRF) model (Lafferty et 
al., 2001). As a pre-processing step, we group con- 
tiguous non-native characters (e.g., Latin characters 
in Arabic text). The model assigns four labels:

• I: Continuation of a morpheme
• O: Outside morpheme (whitespace)
• B: Beginning of a morpheme
• F: Non-native character(s)



  2 Segmentation also improves translation of compounding 
languages such as German (Dyer, 2009) and Finnish (Macherey


Translation Model
e	Target sequence of I words
f	Source sequence of J words
a 	Sequence of K phrase alignments for (e, f )
Π 	Permutation of the alignments for target word order e
h 	Sequence of M feature functions
λ	Sequence of learned weights for the M features
H	A priority queue of hypotheses

Class-based Agreement Model
t ∈ T 	Set of morpho-syntactic classes
s ∈ S 	Set of all word segments
θseg 	Learned weights for the CRF-based segmenter
θtag 	Learned weights for the CRF-based tagger
φo , φt	CRF potential functions (emission and transition)
τ	Sequence of I target-side predicted classes
π	T dimensional (log) prior distribution over classes


Set of Classes The tagger assigns morpho-
syntactic classes, which  are coarse POS categories 
refined with grammatical features such as gender 
and definiteness. The coarse categories are the 
universal POS tag set described by Petrov et al. 
(2012). More than 25 tree- banks (in 22 
languages) can be automatically  mapped to this 
tag set, which includes “Noun” (nominals), 
“Verb” (verbs), “Adj” (adjectives), and “ADP” 
(pre- and post-positions). Many of these 
treebanks also contain per-token 
morphological annotations. It is easy to 
combine the coarse categories with selected 
grammatical annotations.


sˆ	Sequence of l word segments


σ 	Model state: a tagged segment (s, t)

Figure 3: Notation used in this paper. The convention eI
indicates  a subsequence of a length I sequence.


The features are indicators for (character, position, 
label) triples for a five character window and bigram 
label transition indicators.
  This formulation is inspired by the classic “IOB” 
text chunking model (Ramshaw and Marcus, 1995), 
which has been previously applied to Chinese seg- 
mentation (Peng et al., 2004). It can be learned from 
gold-segmented data, generally applies to languages 
with bound morphemes, and does not require a hand- 
compiled lexicon.3 Moreover, it has only four labels, 
so Viterbi decoding is very fast. We learn the param- 
eters θseg using a quasi-Newton  (QN) procedure with 
l1 (lasso) regularization (Andrew and Gao, 2007).

2.3    Morpho-syntactic Tagging

After segmentation, we tag each segment with a fine- 
grained morpho-syntactic class. For this task we also 
train a standard  CRF model on full sentences with 
gold classes and segmentation.  We use the same QN 
procedure as before to obtain θtag .
A translation derivation is a tuple (e, f, a) where
e is the target, f is the source, and a is an alignment 
between the two. The CRF tagging model predicts a
target-side class sequence τ ∗

I
τ ∗ = arg max ) θtag · {φo(τi, i, e) + φt(τi, τi−1)}
i=1
where further notation is defined in Fig. 3.

3 Mada, the standard tool for Arabic segmentation (Habash


For Arabic, we used the coarse POS tags plus

definiteness and the so-called phi features (gender, 
number, and person).4  For example,  ._}...-ll ‘the
car’ would be tagged “Noun+Def+Sg+Fem”.  We 
restricted the set of classes to observed combinations 
in the training data, so the model implicitly disallows 
incoherent  classes like “Verb+Def”.

Features   The tagging CRF includes emission fea- 
tures φo that indicate  a class τi appearing with various 
orthographic characteristics of the word sequence 
being tagged. In typical CRF inference, the entire 
observation  sequence is available throughout infer- 
ence, so these features can be scored on observed 
words in an arbitrary neighborhood around the cur- 
rent position i. However, we conduct CRF inference 
in tandem with the translation decoding procedure 
(§3), creating an environment in which subsequent 
words of the observation are not available; the MT 
system has yet to generate the rest of the translation 
when the tagging features for a position are scored. 
Therefore, we only define emission features on the 
observed words at the current and previous positions 
of a class: φo(τi, ei, ei−1).
The emission features are word types, prefixes and
suffixes of up to three characters, and indicators for 
digits and punctuation. None of these features are 
language specific.
  Bigram transition features φt  encode local agree- 
ment relations. For example, the model learns that the 
Arabic class “Noun+Fem” is followed by “Adj+Fem” 
and not “Adj+Masc” (noun-adjective gender agree- 
ment).

4 Case is also relevant to agreement in Arabic, but it is mostly


2.4    Word Class Sequence Scoring

The CRF tagger model defines a conditional  distribu- 
tion p(τ |e; θtag ) for a class sequence τ given a sen- 
tence e and model parameters θtag . That is, the sam- 
ple space is over class—not word—sequences. How- 
ever, in MT, we seek a measure of sentence quality 
q(e) that is comparable across different hypotheses 
on the beam (much like the n-gram language model 
score). Discriminative model scores have been used 
as MT features (Galley and Manning, 2009), but we 
obtained better results by scoring the 1-best class se- 
quences with a generative model.  We trained a simple 
add-1 smoothed bigram language model over gold 
class sequences in the same treebank training  data:
I


Input: implicitly defined search space 
generate initial hypotheses and add to H
set Hf inal to ∅
while H is not empty:
set Hext to ∅
for each hypothesis η in H :
if η is a goal hypothesis:
add η to Hf inal
else Extend η and add to Hext 	..,Score agreement
Recombine and Prune Hext
set H to Hext
Output: argmax of Hf inal

Figure 4: Breadth-first beam search algorithm  of Och and 
Ney (2004). Typically, a hypothesis  stack H is maintained 
for each unique source coverage set.

Input: (eI , n, is_goal)


run segmenter on attachment eI


to get sˆL


q(e) = p(τ ) = n p(τi|τi−1)



et model state σ =



s, t



for translation prefix en


i=1
We chose a bigram model due to the aggressive


g
initialize π to −∞
set π(t) = 0


n+1 	1
)	1


recombination strategy in our phrase-based decoder.


compute τ ∗ from parameters  s, sˆL , π, is_goal)


For contexts in which the LM is guaranteed to back 
off (for instance, after an unseen bigram), our decoder


compute q(eI	) = p(τ


∗) under the generative LM
L ) for prefix eI


maintains only the minimal state needed (perhaps only


Output


: q(eI	)


a single word). In less restrictive  decoders, higher 
order scoring models could be used to score longer- 
distance agreement relations.
  We integrate the segmentation, tagging, and scor- 
ing models into a self-contained  component  in the 
translation decoder.

3    Inference during Translation Decoding

Scoring the agreement model as part of translation 
decoding requires a novel inference procedure. Cru- 
cially, the inference procedure does not measurably 
affect total MT decoding time.

3.1    Phrase-based Translation  Decoding

We consider the standard phrase-based approach to 
MT (Och and Ney, 2004). The distribution p(e|f ) is 
modeled directly using a log-linear model, yielding 
the following decision rule:


Figure 5: Procedure for scoring agreement for each hy- 
pothesis generated during the search algorithm of Fig. 4. 
In the extended hypothesis eI , the index n + 1 indicates 
the start of the new attachment.


• Extend a hypothesis  with a new phrase pair
• Recombine hypotheses with identical states

We assume familiarity with these operations, which 
are described in detail in (Och and Ney, 2004).

3.2    Agreement Model Inference

The class-based agreement model is implemented as 
a feature function hm  in Eq. (1). Specifically, when 
Extend generates a new hypothesis, we run the algo- 
rithm shown in Fig. 5. The inputs are a translation 
hypothesis eI , an index n distinguishing the prefix 
from the attachment, and a flag indicating if their 
concatenation is a goal hypothesis.
The beam search maintains state for each deriva-


e∗ = arg max
e,a,Π


( M	)
) λmhm(e, f, 
a, Π)
m=1



(1)


tion, the score of 
which is a linear 
combination of 
the feature values. 
States in this 
program depend 
on some amount 
of lexical history. 
With a trigram 
lan-


This decoding problem is NP-hard, thus a beam search 
is often used (Fig. 4). The beam search relies on three 
operations, two of which affect the agreement model:


guage model, the state might be the last two words 
of the translation prefix. Recombine can be applied 
to any two hypotheses with equivalent states. As a


result, two hypotheses with different full prefixes— 
and thus potentially different sequences of agreement 
relations—can be recombined.

Incremental Greedy Decoding  Decoding with 
the CRF-based tagger model in this setting requires 
some slight modifications to the Viterbi algorithm. 
We make a greedy approximation that permits recom- 
bination and works well in practice. The agreement 
model state is the last tagged segment (s, t) of the 
concatenated hypothesis. We tag a new attachment by 
assuming a prior distribution π over the starting posi- 
tion such that π(t) = 0 and −∞ for all other classes, 
a deterministic  distribution in the tropical semiring. 
This forces the Viterbi path to go through t. We only 
tag the final boundary symbol for goal hypotheses.
  To accelerate tagger decoding in our experiments, 
we also used tagging dictionaries for frequently ob- 
served word types. For each word type observed more 
than 100 times in the training data, we restricted the 
set of possible classes to the set of observed classes.

3.3    Translation Model Features

The agreement model score is one decoder feature 
function. The output of the procedure in Fig. 5 is the 
log probability of the class sequence of each attach- 
ment. Summed over all attachments, this gives the 
log probability of the whole class sequence.
  We also add a new length penalty feature. To dis- 
criminate between hypotheses that might have the 
same number of raw tokens, but different underlying 
segmentations, we add a penalty equal to the length 
difference between the segmented and unsegmented
attachments |sˆL| − |eI      |.


solution is to manually extract unification rules from 
phrase-structure trees. Williams and Koehn (2011) 
annotated German trees, and extracted translation 
rules from them. They then specified manual unifi- 
cation rules, and applied a penalty according to the 
number of unification failures in a hypothesis. In 
contrast, our class-based model does not require any 
manual rules and scores similar agreement phenom- 
ena as probabilistic sequences.

Factored Translation Models  Factored transla- 
tion models (Koehn and Hoang, 2007) facilitate a 
more data-oriented approach to agreement modeling. 
Words are represented as a vector of features such as 
lemma and POS. The bitext is annotated with separate 
models, and the annotations are saved during phrase 
extraction.  Hassan et al. (2007) noticed that the target- 
side POS sequences could be scored, much as we do 
in this work. They used a target-side LM over Combi- 
natorial Categorial Grammar (CCG) supertags, along 
with a penalty for the number of operator violations, 
and also modified the phrase probabilities  based on 
the tags. However, Birch et al. (2007) showed that 
this approach captures the same re-ordering phenom- 
ena as lexicalized re-ordering models, which were 
not included in the baseline. Birch et al. (2007) then 
investigated source-side CCG supertag features, but 
did not show an improvement for Dutch-English.
  Subotin (2011) recently extended factored transla- 
tion models to hierarchical phrase-based translation 
and developed a discriminative  model for predicting 
target-side morphology in English-Czech. His model 
benefited from gold morphological annotations on
the target-side of the 8M sentence bitext.


1

4	Related Work


n+1
  

In contrast to these 
methods, our model 
does not af- fect 
phrase extraction and 
does not require 
annotated translation 
rules.


We compare our class-based model to previous ap-
proaches to scoring syntactic relations in MT.

Unification-based Formalisms  Agreement rules 
impose syntactic and semantic constraints on the 
structure of sentences.  A principled way to model 
these constraints  is with a unification-based  gram- 
mar (UBG). Johnson (2003) presented algorithms  for 
learning and parsing with stochastic UBGs. However, 
training data for these formalisms remains extremely 
limited,  and it is unclear how to learn such knowledge- 
rich representations from unlabeled data. One partial



Class-based LMs   Class-based LMs (Brown et al.,
1992) reduce lexical sparsity by placing words in 
equivalence classes. They have been widely used 
for speech recognition,  but not for MT. Och (1999) 
showed a method for inducing bilingual word classes 
that placed each phrase pair into a two-dimensional 
equivalence class. To our knowledge, Uszkoreit and 
Brants (2008) are the only recent authors to show an 
improvement in a state-of-the-art  MT system using 
class-based LMs. They used a classical exchange al- 
gorithm for clustering,  and learned 512 classes from


a large monolingual corpus. Then they mixed the 
classes into a word-based  LM. However, both Och 
(1999) and Uszkoreit and Brants (2008) relied on 
automatically  induced classes. It is unclear if their 
classes captured agreement information.
  Monz (2011) recently investigated parameter es- 
timation for POS-based language models, but his 
classes did not include inflectional features.

Target-Side Syntactic LMs   Our agreement model 
is a form of syntactic LM, of which there is a long 
history of research, especially in speech processing.5
Syntactic LMs have traditionally been too slow for 
scoring during MT decoding. One exception was 
the quadratic-time dependency language model pre- 
sented by Galley and Manning (2009). They applied 
a quadratic time dependency parser to every hypothe- 
sis during decoding. However, to achieve quadratic 
running time, they permitted ill-formed trees (e.g., 
parses with multiple roots). More recently, Schwartz 
et al. (2011) integrated  a right-corner, incremental 
parser into Moses. They showed a large improve- 
ment for Urdu-English, but decoding slowed by three 
orders of magnitude.6 In contrast, our class-based 
model encodes shallow syntactic information without 
a noticeable effect on decoding time.

  Our model can be viewed as a way to score local 
syntactic relations without extensive decoder modifi- 
cations. For long-distance relations, Shen et al. (2010) 
proposed  a new decoder that generates target-side 
dependency trees. The target-side structure enables 
scoring hypotheses with a trigram  dependency LM.

5    Experiments

We first evaluate the Arabic segmenter and tagger 
components independently,  then provide English- 
Arabic translation quality results.

5.1    Intrinsic Evaluation of Components

Experimental Setup  All experiments use the Penn



Full (%)	Incremental (%)

Segmenter	98.6	– 
Tagger	96.3	96.2

Table 1: Intrinsic evaluation accuracy [%] (development 
set) for Arabic segmentation and tagging.


  The ATB contains clitic-segmented text with per- 
segment morphological analyses  (in  addition to 
phrase-structure trees, which we discard). For train- 
ing the segmenter, we used markers in the vocalized 
section to construct the IOB character sequences. For 
training the tagger, we automatically  converted the 
ATB morphological analyses to the fine-grained class 
set. This procedure resulted in 89 classes.
  For the segmentation evaluation, we report per- 
character labeling accuracy.8  For the tagger, we re- 
port per-token accuracy.

Results  Tbl. 1 shows development set accuracy for 
two settings. Full is a standard evaluation  in which 
features may be defined over the whole sentence. This 
includes next-character segmenter features and next- 
word tagger features. Incremental emulates the MT 
setting in which the models are restricted to current 
and previous observation features. Since the seg- 
menter operates at the character level, we can use 
the same feature set. However, next-observation fea- 
tures must be removed from the tagger. Nonetheless, 
tagging accuracy only decreases by 0.1%.

5.2    Translation Quality

Experimental Setup  Our decoder is based on the 
phrase-based approach to translation (Och and Ney,
2004) and contains various feature functions includ- 
ing phrase relative frequency, word-level alignment 
statistics, and lexicalized re-ordering models (Till- 
mann, 2004; Och et al., 2004). We tuned the feature 
weights on a development set using lattice-based min-
imum error rate training (MERT) (Macherey et al.,


Arabic Treebank (ATB) (Maamouri et al., 2004) parts	 	


1–3 divided into training/dev/test sections according 
to the canonical split (Rambow et al., 2005).7

5 See (Zhang, 2009) for a comprehensive  survey.
     6 In principle,  their parser should run in linear time. An imple- 
mentation issue may account for the decoding slowdown. (p.c.)
     7 LDC   catalog  numbers:	LDC2008E61   (ATBp1v4), 
LDC2008E62 (ATBp2v3),  and LDC2008E22 (ATBp3v3.1).


The data was pre-processed with packages from the Stanford 
Arabic parser (Green and Manning, 2010). The corpus split is 
available at http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/arabic.shtml.
     8 We ignore orthographic re-normalization performed by the 
annotators. For example, they converted the contraction ‘ Jl’ ll 
back to ‘ Jl J’ l Al. As a result, we can report accuracy since
the guess and gold segmentations have equal numbers of non- 
whitespace characters.


MT04 (tune)	MT02 	MT03 	MT05 	Avg

Ba
sel
ine
18
.1
4

23
.8
7

1
8.
8
8

2
2.
6
0

+
PO
S
18
.1
1
−
0
.
0
3
23
.6
5
−
0
.
2
2
1
8.
9
9
+
0
.
1
1
2
2.
2
9
−
0
.
3
1
−
0.
1
7
+
PO
S
+
Ag
r
18
.8
6
+
0
.
7
2
24
.8
4
+
0
.
9
7
2
0.
2
6
+
1
.
3
8
2
3.
4
8
+
0
.
8
8
+
1.
0
4
ge
nre
s

n
w

nw

nw

n
w

#s
ent
en
ce
s

13
53

72
8

66
3

10
56
2
4
4
7

Table 2: Translation quality results (BLEU-4 [%]) for newswire (nw) sets. Avg is the weighted averaged (by number of 
sentences) of the individual test set gains. All improvements  are statistically significant at p ≤ 0.01.




MT06 	MT08 	Avg

Baseline	14.68	14.30
+POS	14.57	−0.11   14.30	+0.0	−0.06
+POS+Agr	15.04	+0.36   14.49	+0.19   +0.29

genres 	nw,bn,ng	nw,ng,wb
#sentences	1797	1360	3157

Table 3: Mixed genre test set results (BLEU-4 [%]). The 
MT06 result is statistically significant at p ≤ 0.01; MT08 
is significant at p ≤ 0.02. The genres are: nw, broadcast 
news (bn), newsgroups (ng), and weblog (wb).


2008). For each set of results, we initialized MERT
with uniform feature weights.
  We trained the translation model on 502 million 
words of parallel text collected from a variety of 
sources, including the Web. Word alignments were in- 
duced using a hidden Markov model based alignment 
model (Vogel et al., 1996) initialized with bilexical 
parameters from IBM Model 1 (Brown et al., 1993). 
Both alignment models were trained using two itera- 
tions of the expectation maximization algorithm. Our 
distributed 4-gram language model was trained on
600 million words of Arabic text, also collected from 
many sources including  the Web (Brants et al., 2007).
  For development and evaluation, we used the NIST 
Arabic-English data sets, each of which contains one 
set of Arabic sentences and multiple English refer- 
ences. To reverse the translation direction for each 
data set, we chose the first English reference  as the 
source and the Arabic as the reference.
  The NIST sets come in two varieties: newswire 
(MT02-05) and mixed genre (MT06,08). Newswire 
contains primarily Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), 
while the mixed genre data sets also contain tran- 
scribed speech and web text. Since the ATB contains 
MSA, and significant lexical and syntactic differences


may exist between MSA and the mixed genres, we 
achieved best results by tuning on MT04, the largest 
newswire set.
  We evaluated translation quality with BLEU-4 (Pa- 
pineni et al., 2002) and computed statistical signifi- 
cance with the approximate randomization method 
of Riezler and Maxwell (2005).9

6    Discussion of Translation Results

Tbl. 2 shows translation quality results on newswire, 
while Tbl. 3 contains results for mixed genres. The 
baseline is our standard system  feature set.  For 
comparison, +POS indicates our class-based model 
trained on the 11 coarse POS tags only (e.g., “Noun”). 
Finally, +POS+Agr shows the class-based model 
with the fine-grained classes (e.g., “Noun+Fem+Sg”).
  The best result—a +1.04 BLEU average gain— 
was achieved when the class-based model training 
data, MT tuning set, and MT evaluation set contained 
the same genre. We realized smaller, yet statistically 
significant, gains on the mixed genre data sets. We 
tried tuning on both MT06 and MT08, but obtained 
insignificant gains. In the next section, we investigate 
this issue further.

Tuning with a Treebank-Trained Feature   The 
class-based model is trained on the ATB, which is pre- 
dominantly MSA text. This data set is syntactically 
regular, meaning that it does not have highly dialectal 
content, foreign scripts, disfluencies, etc. Conversely, 
the mixed genre data sets contain more irregulari- 
ties. For example, 57.4% of MT06 comes from non- 
newswire genres. Of the 764 newsgroup sentences,
112 contain some Latin script tokens, while others 
contain very little morphology:

9 With the implementation of Clark et al. (2011), available at:
http://github.com/jhclark/multeval.


(2)	 .    l 1/2  _  J 


 } 


Human Evaluation	We 
also manually evaluated


mix


1/2 cup


vinegar 
apple


the MT05 
output for 
improvemen
ts in 
agreement.
11


Mix 1/2 cup apple vinegar


Our system produced different 
output from the base-
line for 785 (74.3%) sentences. 
We randomly sam-



(3)	 


  }


 __... 


} 
	Music
Match



pled 100 
of these 
sentences 
and 
counted 
agreeme
nt


start program miozik maatsh MusicMatch
Start the program music match (MusicMatch)


In these imperatives,  there are no lexically marked 
agreement relations to score. Ex. (2) is an excerpt 
from a recipe that appears in full in MT06. Ex. (3) 
is part of usage instructions  for the MusicMatch soft- 
ware. The ATB contains few examples like these, so 
our class-based model probably does not effectively 
discriminate between alternative hypotheses for these 
types of sentences.

Phrase Table Coverage    In  a  standard  phrase- 
based system, effective translation  into a highly in- 
flected target language requires that the phrase table 
contain the inflected word forms necessary to con- 
struct an output with correct agreement. If the requi- 
site words are not present in the search space of the 
decoder, then no feature function would be sufficient 
to enforce morpho-syntactic agreement.
  During development, we observed that the phrase 
table of our large-scale English-Arabic system did 
often contain the inflected forms that we desired the 
system to select. In fact, correctly agreeing alterna- 
tives often appeared in n-best translation lists. To 
verify this observation, we computed the lexical cov- 
erage of the MT05 reference sentences in the decoder 
search space. The statistics below report the token- 
level recall of reference unigrams:10


errors of all types. The baseline contained 78 errors, 
while our system produced 66 errors, a statistically 
significant 15.4% error reduction at p ≤ 0.01 accord- 
ing to a paired t-test.
  In our output, a frequent source of remaining errors 
was the case of so-called “deflected agreement”: inan- 
imate plural nouns require feminine singular agree- 
ment with modifiers. On the other hand, animate 
plural nouns require the sound plural, which is indi- 
cated by an appropriate masculine or feminine suffix.
For example, the inanimate plural   }.�_ll ’states’ re-
quires the singular feminine adjective . ;.,.. Jl ‘united’,
not the sound plural   l   ;.,.. Jl. The ATB does not con-
tain animacy annotations, so our agreement model
cannot discriminate between these two cases. How- 
ever, Alkuhlani and Habash (2011) have recently 
started annotating  the ATB  for animacy, and our 
model could benefit as more data is released.

7    Conclusion and Outlook

Our class-based agreement model improves transla- 
tion quality by promoting local agreement, but with 
a minimal increase in decoding time and no addi- 
tional storage requirements for the phrase table. The 
model can be implemented with a standard CRF pack- 
age, trained on existing treebanks for many languages, 
and integrated easily with many MT feature APIs. 
We achieved best results when the model training 
data, MT tuning set, and MT evaluation set con-








  The bottom category includes all lexical items that 
the decoder could produce in a translation of the 
source. This large gap between the unigram recall 
of the actual translation output (top) and the lexical 
coverage of the phrase-based model (bottom) indi- 
cates that translation performance can be improved 
dramatically by altering the translation model through 
features such as ours, without expanding the search 
space of the decoder.


mixed genre evaluation sets.
  In principle, our class-based model should be more 
robust to unseen word types and other phenomena that 
make non-newswire  genres challenging. However, 
our analysis has shown that for Arabic, these genres 
typically contain more Latin script and transliterated 
words, and thus there is less morphology to score. 
One potential avenue of future work would be to adapt 
our component models to new genres by self-training 
them on the target side of a large bitext.


10 To focus on possibly inflected word forms, we excluded	 	


numbers and punctuation from this analysis.


11 The annotator was the first author.


Acknowledgments We thank Zhifei Li and Chris Manning 
for helpful discussions, and Klaus Macherey, Wolfgang 
Macherey, Daisy Stanton, and Richard Zens for engineer- 
ing support. This work was conducted while the first au- 
thor was an intern at Google. At Stanford, the first author 
is supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate 
Research Fellowship.

References

S. Alkuhlani and N. Habash. 2011.  A corpus for modeling 
morpho-syntactic agreement in Arabic: Gender, number and 
rationality. In ACL-HLT.
G. Andrew and J. Gao. 2007. Scalable training of l1 -regularized 
log-linear models. In ICML.
E. Avramidis and P. Koehn. 2008. Enriching morphologically 
poor languages for statistical machine translation. In ACL.
A. Birch, M. Osborne, and P. Koehn. 2007. CCG supertags in 
factored statistical machine translation. In WMT.
T. Brants, A. C. Popat, P. Xu, F. J. Och, and J. Dean. 2007. Large 
language models in machine translation. In EMNLP-CoNLL.
P. F. Brown, P. V. deSouza, R. L. Mercer, V. J. Della Pietra, 
and J. C. Lai. 1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural 
language. Computational Linguistics, 18:467–479.
P. F. Brown,  S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, and R. L. Mercer.
1993.  The mathematics of statistical machine translation: 
Parameter estimation.  Computational  Linguistics,  19(2):263–
313.
D. Cer, M. Galley, D. Jurafsky, and C. D. Manning. 2010. Phrasal: 
A statistical machine translation toolkit for exploring new 
model features. In HLT-NAACL, Demonstration Session.
J. H. Clark, C. Dyer, A. Lavie, and N. A. Smith. 2011. Better hy- 
pothesis testing for statistical machine translation: Controlling 
for optimizer instability. In ACL.
C. Dyer. 2009. Using a maximum entropy model to build seg- 
mentation lattices for MT. In NAACL.
A. El Kholy and N. Habash. 2012.  Orthographic and mor- 
phological processing for English-Arabic statistical machine 
translation. Machine Translation, 26(1-2):25–45.
A. Fraser, M. Weller, A. Cahill, and F. Cap. 2012. Modeling 
inflection and word-formation  in SMT. In EACL.
M. Galley and C. D. Manning. 2009. Quadratic-time dependency 
parsing for machine translation. In ACL-IJCNLP.
S. Green and C. D. Manning.  2010.  Better Arabic parsing:
baselines, evaluations, and analysis. In COLING.
N. Habash and O. Rambow. 2005. Arabic tokenization, part-of- 
speech tagging and morphological disambiguation in one fell 
swoop. In ACL.
N. Habash and F. Sadat. 2006. Arabic preprocessing schemes 
for statistical machine translation. In NAACL.
H. Hassan, K. Sima’an, and A. Way. 2007. Supertagged phrase- 
based statistical machine translation.  In ACL.
M. Johnson. 2003. Learning and parsing stochastic unification- 
based grammars.  In COLT.
P. Koehn and H. Hoang. 2007. Factored translation models. In
EMNLP-CoNLL.


P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2003. Empirical methods for compound 
splitting. In EACL.
P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch, M. Federico, 
N. Bertoldi, et al. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for sta- 
tistical machine translation. In ACL, Demonstration Session.
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Conditional ran- 
dom fields: Probablistic models for segmenting and labeling 
sequence data. In ICML.
A. Lopez. 2008. Statistical machine translation. ACM Computing
Surveys, 40(8):1–49.
M. Maamouri, A. Bies, T. Buckwalter, and W. Mekki.  2004.
The Penn Arabic Treebank: Building a large-scale  annotated
Arabic corpus. In NEMLAR.
W. Macherey, F. Och, I. Thayer, and J. Uszkoreit. 2008. Lattice- 
based minimum  error rate training for statistical machine trans- 
lation. In EMNLP.
K. Macherey, A. Dai, D. Talbot, A. Popat, and F. Och. 2011.
Language-independent compound splitting with morphologi- 
cal operations. In ACL.
E. Minkov, K. Toutanova, and H. Suzuki.  2007. Generating 
complex morphology for machine translation. In ACL.
C. Monz. 2011. Statistical machine translation with local lan- 
guage models. In EMNLP.
F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2004. The alignment template approach 
to statistical machine translation. Computational Linguistics,
30(4):417–449.
F. J. Och, D. Gildea, S. Khudanpur, A. Sarkar, K. Yamada, 
A. Fraser, et al.  2004. A smorgasbord of features for sta- 
tistical machine translation. In HLT-NAACL.
F. J. Och. 1999. An efficient method for determining bilingual 
word classes. In EACL.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a 
method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In 
ACL.
F. Peng, F. Feng, and A. McCallum. 2004. Chinese segmentation 
and new word detection using conditional random fields. In 
COLING.
S. Petrov, D. Das, and R. McDonald. 2012. A universal part-of- 
speech tagset. In LREC.
O. Rambow, D. Chiang, M. Diab, N. Habash, R. Hwa, et al. 2005.
Parsing Arabic dialects.  Technical report, Johns Hopkins
University.
L. A. Ramshaw and M. Marcus. 1995. Text chunking using 
transformation-based learning. In Proc. of the Third Workshop 
on Very Large Corpora.
S. Riezler and J. T. Maxwell.  2005. On some pitfalls in auto- 
matic evaluation and significance testing in MT. In ACL-05
Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for
Machine Translation and/or Summarization (MTSE).
L. Schwartz, C. Callison-Burch, W. Schuler, and S. Wu. 2011.
Incremental syntactic language models for phrase-based trans- 
lation. In ACL-HLT.
L. Shen, J. Xu, and R. Weischedel. 2010. String-to-dependency 
statistical machine translation. Computational Linguistics,
36(4):649–671.


M. Subotin. 2011. An exponential translation model for target 
language morphology. In ACL-HLT.

C. Tillmann. 2004. A unigram orientation model for statistical 
machine translation. In NAACL.

K. Toutanova, H. Suzuki, and A. Ruopp. 2008. Applying mor- 
phology generation models to machine translation. In ACL- 
HLT.

J. Uszkoreit and T. Brants. 2008. Distributed word clustering


for large scale class-based language modeling in machine 
translation. In ACL-HLT.
S. Vogel, H. Ney, and C. Tillmann.  1996. HMM-based word 
alignment in statistical translation. In COLING.
P. Williams and P. Koehn.  2011.  Agreement constraints for 
statistical machine translation into German. In WMT.
Y. Zhang. 2009. Structured Language Models for Statistical Ma- 
chine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon University.



