Quasi-Destructive Graph Unification 
Hideto Tomabechi 

Carnegie Mellon University 
109 EDSH, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 tomabech+@cs.cmu.edu 


ABSTRACT 
Graph unification is the most expensive part of unification-based grammar parsing. It of- ten takes over 90% of the total parsing time of a sentence. We focus on two speed-up elements in the design of unification algo- rithms: 1) elimination of excessive copying by only copying successful unifications, 2) Finding unification failures as soon as possi- ble. We have developed a scheme to attain these two elements without expensive over- head through temporarily modifying graphs during unification to eliminate copying dur- ing unification. We found that parsing rel- atively long sentences (requiring about 500 top-level unifications during a parse) using our algorithm is approximately twice as fast as parsing the same sentences using Wrob- lewski's algorithm. 


1. Motivation 
Graph unification is the most expensive part of unification-based grammar parsing systems. For ex- ample, in the three types of parsing systems currently used at ATR ], all of which use graph unification algo- rithms based on [Wroblewski, 1987], unification oper- ations consume 85 to 90 percent of the total cpu time devoted to a parse. 2 The number of unification opera- tions per sentence tends to grow as the grammar gets larger and more complicated. An unavoidable paradox is that when the natural language system gets larger and the coverage of linguistic phenomena increases the writers of natural language grammars tend to rely more on deeper and more complex path equations (cy- cles and frequent reentrancy) to lessen the complexity of writing the grammar. As a result, we have seen that the number of unification operations increases rapidly as the coverage of the grammar grows in contrast to the parsing algorithm itself which does not seem to 
*Visiting Research Scientist. Local email address: tomabech%al~-la.al~.co.jp@ uunet.UU.NET. 1The three parsing systems are based on: 1. Earley's algorithm, 2. active chartparsing, 3. generalized LR parsing. 
2In the large-scale HPSG-based spoken Japanese analy- sis system developed at ATR, sometimes 98 percent of the elapsed time is devoted to graph unification ([Kogure, 1990]). 

ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories* 
Seika-cho,Sorakugun, Kyoto 619-02 JAPAN 
grow so quickly. Thus, it makes sense to speed up the unification operations to improve the total speed performance of the natural language systems. 
Our original unification algorithm was based on [Wroblewskl, 1987] which was chosen in 1988 as the then fastest algorithm available for our applica- tion (HPSG based unification grammar, three types of parsers (Earley, Tomita-LR, and active chart), unifica- tion with variables and cycles 3 combined with Kasper's ([Kasper, 1987]) scheme for handling disjunctions. In designing the graph unification algorithm, we have made the following observation which influenced the basic design of the new algorithm described in this paper: 
Unification does not always succeed. 

As we will see from the data presented in a later section, when our parsing system operates with a relatively small grammar, about 60 percent of the unifications attempted during a successful parse result in failure. If a unification falls, any computation performed and memory consumed during the unification is wasted. As the grammar size increases, the number of unification failures for each successful parse increases 4. Without completely rewriting the grammar and the parser, it seems difficult to shift any significant amount of the computational burden to the parser in order to reduce the number of unification failures 5. 
Another problem that we would like to address in our design, which seems to be well documented in the existing literature is that: 
Copying is an expensive operation. 

The copying of a node is a heavy burden to the pars- ing system. [Wroblewski, 1987] calls it a "computa- tional sink". Copying is expensive in two ways: 1) it takes time; 2) it takes space. Copying takes time and space essentially because the area in the random access memory needs to be dynamically allocated which is an expensive operation. [Godden, 1990] calculates the computation time cost of copying to be about 67 per- 
3Please refer to [Kogure, 1989] for trivial time modifica- tion of Wroblewski's algorithm to handle cycles. 
4We estimate over 80% of unifications to be failures in 
our large-scale speech-to-speech translation system under 
development. 
5Of course, whether that will improve the overall perfor- mance is another question. 
cent of the total parsing time in his TIME parsing sys- tem. This time/space burden of copying is non-trivial when we consider the fact that creation of unneces- sary copies will eventually trigger garbage collections more often (in a Lisp environment) which will also slow down the overall performance of the parsing sys- tem. In general, parsing systems are always short of memory space (such as large LR tables of Tomita-LR parsers and expan~ng tables and charts of Farley and active chart parsers"), and the marginal addition or sub- traction of the amount of memory space consumed by other parts of the system often has critical effects on the performance of these systems. 
Considering the aforementioned problems, we pro- pose the following principles to be the desirable con- ditions for a fast graph unification algorithm: 
• 	
Copying should be performed only for success- ful unifications. 

• 	
Unification failures should be found as soon as possible. 



By way of definition we would like to categorize ex- cessive copying of dags into Over Copying and Early Copying. Our definition of over copying is the same as Wroblewski's; however, our definition of early copying is slightly different. 
• 	
Over Copying: Two dags are created in order to create one new dag. -This typically happens when copies of two input dags are created prior to a destructive unification operation to build one new dag. ([Godden, 1990] calls such a unifica- tion: Eager Unification.). When two arcs point to the same node, over copying is often unavoidable with incremental copying schemes. 

• 	
Early Copying: Copies are created prior to the failure of unification so that copies created since the beginning of the unification up to the point of failure are wasted. 



Wroblewski defines Early Copying as follows: "The argument dags are copied before unification started. If the unification falls then some of the copying is wasted effort" and restricts early copying to cases that only apply to copies that are created prior to a unification. Restricting early copying to copies that are made prior to a unification leaves a number of wasted copies that are created during a unification up to the point of failure to be uncovered by either of the above definitions for excessive copying. We would like Early Copying to mean all copies that are wasted due to a unification fail- ure whether these copies are created before or during the actual unification operations. 
Incremental copying has been accepted as an effec- tive method of minimizing over copying and eliminat- 
6For example, our phoneme-based generalized LR parser for speech input is always running on a swapping space be- causethe LR table is too big. 
ing early copying as defined by Wroblewski. How-ever, while being effective in minimizing over copying (it over copies only in some cases of convergent arcs into one node), incremental copying is ineffective in eliminating early copying as we define it. 7 Incremen- tal copying is ineffective in eliminating early copying because when a gra_ph unification algorithm recurses for shared arcs (i.e. the arcs with labels that exist in both input graphs), each created unification operation recursing into each shared arc is independent of other recursive calls into other arcs. In other words, the re- cursive calls into shared arcs are non-deterministic and there is no way for one particular recursion into a shared arc to know the result of future recursions into other shared arcs. Thus even if a particular recursion into one arc succeeds (with minimum over copying and no early copying in Wroblewski's sense), other arcs may eventually fail and thus the copies that are created in the successful arcs are all wasted. We consider it a drawback of incremental copying schemes that copies that are incrementally created up to the point of fail- ure get wasted. This problem will be particularly felt when we consider parallel implementations of incre- mental copying algorithms. Because each recursion into shared arcs is non-deterministic,parallel processes can be created to work concurrently on all arcs. In each of the parallelly created processes for each shared arc, another recursion may take place creating more paral- lel processes. While some parallel recursive call into some arc may take time (due to a large number of sub- arcs, etc.) another non-deterministic call to other arcs may proceed deeper and deeper creating a large num- ber of parallel processes. In the meantime, copies are incrementally created at different depths of subgraphs as long as the subgraphs of each of them are unified successfully. This way, when a failure is finally de- tected at some deep location in some subgraph, other numerous processes may have created a large number of copies that are wasted. Thus, early copying will be a significant problem when we consider the possibility of parallelizing the unification algorithms as well. 
2. Our Scheme 
We would like to introduce an algorithm which ad- dresses the criteria for fast unification discussed in the previous sections. It also handles cycles without over copying (without any additional schemes such as those introduced by [Kogure, 1989]). 
As a data structure, a node is represented with eight fields: type, arc-list, comp-arc-list, forward, copy, comp-arc-mark, forward-mark, and copy-mark. Al-though this number may seem high for a graph node data structure, the amount of memory consumed is not significantly different from that consumed by other 
7'Early copying' will henceforth be used to refer to early copying as defined by us. 
algorithms. Type can be represented by three bits; comp-arc-mark, forward-mark, and copy-mark can be represented by short integers (i.e. fixnums); and comp- arc-list (just like arc-lis0 is a mere collection of pointers to memory locations. Thus this additional information is trivial in terms of memory cells consumed and be- cause of this dam structure the unification algorithm itself can remain simple. 
NODE 

type 
+............... + 

arc-list 
+ ............... + 

comp-arc-list 
+............... + 

forward 
+............... + 

copy 
+............... + 

comp-arc-mark ARC 
+ ............... + 

forward-mark I label I +............... + +............... + 
copy-mark I value I +............... + 
Figure 1: Node and Arc Structures 

The representation for an arc is no different from that of other unification algorithms. Each arc has two fields for 'label' and 'value'. 'Label' is an atomic symbol which labels the arc, and 'value' is a pointer to a node. 
The central notion of our algorithm is the depen- dency of the representational content on the global timing clock (or the global counter for the current generation of unification algorithms). This scheme was used in [Wroblewski, 1987] to invalidate the copy field of a node after one unification by incrementing a global counter. This is an extremely cheap operation but has the power to invalidate the copy fields of all nodes in the system simultaneously. In our algorithm, this dependency of the content of fields on global tim- ing is adopted for arc lists, forwarding pointers, and copy pointers. Thus any modification made, such as adding forwarding links, copy links or arcs during one top-level unification (unify0) to any node in memory can be invalidated by one increment operation on the global timing counter. During unification (in unifyl) and copying after a successful unification, the global timing ID for a specific field can be checked by compar- ing the content of mark fields with the global counter value and if they match then the content is respected; if not it is simply ignored. Thus the whole operation is a trivial addition to the original destructive unification algorithm (Pereira's and Wroblewski's unifyl). 
We have two kinds of arc lists 1) arc-list and comp- 
arc-list. Arc-list contains the arcs that are permanent (i.e., usual graph arcs) and compare-list contains arcs that are only valid during one graph unification oper- ation. We also have two kinds of forwarding links, i.e., permanent and temporary. A permanent forward- ing link is the usual forwarding link found in other algorithms ([Pereira, 1985], [Wroblewski, 1987], etc). Temporary forwarding links are links that are only valid during one unification. The currency of the temporary links is determined by matching the content of the mark field for the links with the global counter and if they match then the content of this field is respected 8. As in [Pereira, 1985], we have three types of nodes: 1) :atomic, 2) :bottom 9, and 3) :complex. :atomic type nodes represent atomic symbol values (such as Noun), :bottom type nodes are variables and :complex type nodes are nodes that have arcs coming out of them. Arcs are stored in the arc-list field. The atomic value is also stored in the arc-list if the node type is :atomic. :bottom nodes succeed in unifying with any nodes and the result of unification takes the type and the value of the node that the :bottom node was unified with. :atomic nodes succeed in unifying with :bottom nodes or :atomic nodes with the same value (stored in the arc-lis0. Unification of an :atomic node with a :com- plex node immediately fails. :complex nodes succeed in unifying with :bottom nodes or with :complex nodes whose subgraphs all unify. Arc values are always nodes and never symbolic values because the :atomic and :bottom nodes may be pointed to by multiple arcs (just as in structure sharing of :complex nodes) depending on grammar constraints, and we do not want arcs to contain terminal atomic values. Figure 2 is the cen- tral quasi-destructive graph unification algorithm and Figure 3 shows the algorithm for copying nodes and arcs (called by unify0) while respecting the contents of comp-arc-lists. 
The functions Complementarcs(dg 1,dg2) and Inter- sectarcs(dgl,dg2) are similar to Wroblewski's algo- rithm and return the set-difference (the arcs with la- bels that exist in dgl but not in rig2) and intersec- tion (the arcs with labels that exist both in dgl and dg2) respectively. During the set-difference and set- intersection operations, the content of comp-arc-lists are respected as parts of arc lists if the comp-arc- marks match the current value of the global timing counter. Dereference-dg(dg) recursively traverses the forwarding link to return the forwarded node. In do- ing so, it checks the forward-mark of the node and if the forward-mark value is 9 (9 represents a perma- nent forwarding link) or its value matches the current 
8We do not have a separate field for temporary forwarding links; instead, we designate the integer value 9 to represent a permanent forwarding link. We start incrementing the global counter from 10 so whenever the forward-mark is not 9 the integer value must equal the global counter value to respect the forwarding link. 
9Bottom is called leaf in Pereira's algorithm. 
value of *unify-global-counter*, then the function re- turns the forwarded node; otherwise it simply returns the input node. Forward(dgl, dg2, :forward-type) puts (the pointer to) dg2 in the forward field of dgl. If the keyword in the function call is :temporary, the cur- rent value of the *unify-global-counter* is written in the forward-mark field of dgl. If the keyword is :per- manent, 9 is written in the forward-mark field of dgl. Our algorithm itself does not require any permanent forwarding; however, the functionality is added be- cause the grammar reader module that reads the path equation specifications into dg feature-structures uses permanent forwarding to merge the additional gram- matical specifications into a graph structure 1°. The temporary forwarding links are necessary to handle reentrancy and cycles. As soon as unification (at any level of recursion through shared arcs) succeeds, a tem- porary forwarding link is made from dg2 to dgl (dgl to dg2 if dgl is of type :bottom). Thus, during unifi- cation, a node already unified by other recursive calls to unifyl within the same unify0 call has a temporary forwarding link from dg2 to dgl (or dgl to dg2). As a result, if this node becomes an input argument node, dereferencing the node causes dgl and dg2 to become the same node and unification immediately succeeds. Thus a subgraph below an already unified node will not be checked more than once even if an argument graph has a cycle. Also, during copying done subsequently to a successful unification, two ares converging into the same node will not cause over copying simply because if a node already has a copy then the copy is returned. For example, as a case that may cause over copies in other schemes for dg2 convergent arcs, let us consider the case when the destination node has a corresponding node in dgl and only one of the convergent arcs has a corresponding are in dgl. This destination node is al- ready temporarily forwarded to the node in dgl (since the unification check was successful prior to copying). Once a copy is created for the corresponding dgl node and recorded in the copy field of dgl, every time a convergent arc in dg2 that needs to be copied points to its destination node, dereferencing the node returns the corresponding node in dgl and since a copy of it already exists, this copy is returned. Thus no duplicate copy is created H. 
roWe have been using Wroblewski's algorithm for the uni- fication part of the parser and thus usage of (permanent) forwarding links is adopted by the grammar reader module to convert path equations to graphs. For example, permanent forwarding is done when a :bottom node is to be merged with other nodes. 
nCopying of dg2 ares happens for arcs that exist in dg2 but not in dgl (i.e., Complementarcs(dg2,dgl)). Such arcs are pushed to the cornp-arc-list of dgl during unify1 and are copied into the are-list of the copy during subsequent copying. If there is a cycle or a convergence in arcs in dgl or in ares in dg2 that do not have corresponding arcs in dg 1, then the mechanism is even simpler than the one discussed here. A copy is made once, and the same copy is simply returned 
QUASI-DESTRUCTIVE GRAPH UNIFICATION 
FUNCTION unify-dg(dg 1,dg2); result ~ catch with tag 'unify-fail 
calling unify0(dgl,dg2); 
increment *unify-global-counter*; ;; starts from 10 12 
retum(result); 

END; 
FUNCTION unify0(dg 1,dg2); 
if '*T* = unifyl(dgl,dg2); THEN 
copy .--- eopy-dg-with-comp-arcs(dgl); 
return(copy); 



END; 
FUNCTION unify1 (dgl-underef, dg2-underef); dgl ,-- dereference-dg(dgl-underef); dg2 ~-- dereference-dg(dg2-underef); IF (dgl = dg2)I3THEN 
return('*T*); 
ELSE IF (dgl.type = :bottom) THEN 
forward-dg(dg 1,dg2,:ternporary); 
return('*T*); 

ELSE IF (dg2.type = :bottom) THEN 
forward-dg(dg2,dg 1,:temporary); 
return('*T*); 

ELSE IF (dgl.type = :atomic AND 
dg2.type = :atomic) THEN 

IF (dgl.arc-list = dg2.are-list)14THEN forward-dg(dg2,dg 1,:temporary); return('*T*); 
ELSE throwlSwith keyword 'unify-fail; 
ELSE IF (dgl.type = :atomic OR 
dg2.type = :atomic) THEN 
throw with keyword 'unify-fail; 

ELSE new ~ complementarcs(dg2,dgl); shared ~-- intersectarcs(dgl,dg2); FOR EACH arc IN shared DO unifyl (destination of the shared arc for dgl, destination of 

the shared arc for dg2); forward-dg(dg2,dg 1,:temporary); 1~ dg 1.comp-arc-mark *-- *unify-global-counter*; dgl.comp-arc-list ,-- new; return ('*T*); 
END; 


Figure 2: The Q-D. Unification Functions 
every lime another convergent arc points to the original node. 
It is because axes are copied only from either dgl or dg2. 129 indicates a permanent forwarding link. 13Equal in the 'eq' sense. Because of forwarding and 
cycles, it is possible that dgl and dg2 are 'eq'. X4Arc-list contains atomic value if the node is of type :atomic. lSCatch/throw construct; i.e., immediately return to un/fy- dg. 16This will be executed only when all recursive calls into unifyl succeeded. Otherwise, a failure would have caused 

QUASI-DESTRUCTIVECOPYING ] 

FUNCTION copy-dg-with-comp-arcs(dg-undere0; dg ~ dereference-dg(dg-undere0; IF (dg.copy is non-empty AND 
dg.copy-mark = *unify-global-counter*) THEN return(dg.copy);a7 

ELSE IF (dg.type = :atomic) THEN 
copy ,-- create-node0; Is 
copy.type ,-- :atomic; 
copy.are-list ,--- rig.are-list; 
dg.copy ,-- copy; 
dg.eopy-mark ,--- *unify-global-counter*; 
return(copy); 

ELSE IF (dg.type = :bottom) THEN 
copy *- ereate-nodeO; 
copy.type .-- :bottom; 
dg.copy ,-- copy; 
dg.copy-mark ~-- *unify-global-counter*; 
return(copy); 

ELSE 
copy *- create-node(); 
copy.type ,-- :complex; 
FOR ALL are IN dg.are-list DO 

newarc ,- copy-are-and-comp-arc(are); push newarc into copy.are-list; IF (dg.comp-are-list is non-empty AND dg.comp-arc-mark = *unify-global-counter*) THEN 
FOR ALL comp-arc IN dg.comp-are-list DO neware ,-- copy-arc-and-comp-arc(comp-arc); push neware into copy.are-list; 
dg.copy 4-- copy; 
dg.copy-mark ,-- *unify-global-counter*; 
return (copy); 


END; 
FUNCTION copy-arc-and-comp-arcs(input-arc); 
label ,--- input-arc.label; 

value ,-- copy-dg-with-comp-arcs(input-are.value); return a new arc with label and value; END; 
Figure 3: Node and Arc Copying Functions 
Figure 4 shows a simple example of quasi-destructive graph unification with dg2 convergent arcs. The round nodes indicate atomic nodes and the rect- angular nodes indicate bottom (variable) nodes. First, top-level unifyl finds that each of the input graphs has arc-a and arc-b (shared). Then unifyl is recursively called. At step two, the recursion into arc-a locally succeeds, and a temporary forwarding link with time- stamp(n) is made from node [-]2 to node s. At the third step (recursion into arc-b), by the previous forwarding, node f12 already has the value s (by dereferencing). Then this unification returns a success and a tempo- rary forwarding link with time-stamp(n) is created from 
an immediate return to unify.dg. 17I.e., the existing copy of the node. lSCreates an empty node structure. 
node [-] 1 to node s. At the fourth step, since all recur- sive unifications (unifyls) into shared arcs succeeded, top-level unifyl creates a temporary forwarding link with time-stamp(n) from dag2's root node to dagl's root node, and sets arc-c (new) into comp-arc-list of dagl and returns success ('*T*). At the fifth step, a copy of dagl is created respecting the content of comp- arc-list and dereferencing the valid forward links. This copy is returned as a result of unification. At the last step (step six), the global timing counter is incremented (n =:, n+ 1). After this operation, temporary forwarding links and comp-arc-lists with time-stamp (< n+l) will be ignored. Therefore, the original dagl and dag2 are recovered in a constant time without a costly reversing operations. (Also, note that recursions into shared-arcs can be done in any order producing the same result). 
unifyl(dagl,dag2) SHARF~-Ia, b} 
S " t For each node with arc-a. 
unifyl( s, [ ]2) dag 1 dag2 
a b 
forward(n) 

For each node witbare-b. 
unifyl([ ]i,[ ]2) 
forward(n) 
dagl. forwxd(n) dag2 
a/.., ]b-'.fist(n)={c} a//Jb~C 
ot 
forward(n) 
copy-comp-ar¢-list(dag 1) 

copy. of dagl (n) dag~dag2 
S t S ~.~~..~ j ~ t forward(n)
copy ofdagl(n) dagl dag2 

Figure4: A Simple Example of Quasi-Destructive Graph Unification 
As we just saw, the algorithm itself is simple. The basic control structure of the unification is similar to Pereira's and Wroblewski's unifyl. The essential dif- ference between our unifyl and the previous ones is that our unifyl is non-destructive. It is because the complementarcs(dg2,dgl) are set to the comp-arc-list of dgl and not into the are-list of dgl. Thus, as soon as we increment the global counter, the changes made to dgl (i.e., addition of complement arcs into comp- are-list) vanish. As long as the comp-arc-mark value matches that of the global counter the content of the comp-arc-list can be considered a part of arc-list and therefore, dgl is the result of unification. Hence the name quasi-destructive graph unification. In order to create a copy for subsequent use we only need to make a copy of dgl before we increment the global counter while respecting the content of the comp-arc-list of dgl. 
Thus instead of calling other unification functions (such as unify2 of Wroblewski) for incrementally ere- ating a copy node during a unification, we only need to create a copy after unification. Thus, if unifica- tion fails no copies are made at all (as in [Karttunen, 1986]'s scheme). Because unification that recurses into shared ares carries no burden of incremental copy- ing (i.e., it simply checks if nodes are compatible), as the depth of unification increases (i.e., the graph gets larger) the speed-up of our method should get conspic- uous if a unification eventually fails. If all unifica- tions during a parse are going to be successful, our algorithm should be as fast as or slightly slower than Wroblewski's algorithm 19. Since a parse that does not fail on a single unification is unrealistic, the gain from our scheme should depend on the amount of unification failures that occur during a unification. As the number of failures per parse increases and the graphs that failed get larger, the speed-up from our algorithm should be- come more apparent. Therefore, the characteristics of our algorithm seem desirable. In the next section, we will see the actual results of experiments which com- pare our unification algorithm to Wroblewski's algo- rithm (slightly modified to handle variables and cycles that are required by our HPSG based grammar). 



3. Experiments 
Table 1 shows the results of our experiments using an HPSG-based Japanese grammar developed at ATR for a conference registration telephone dialogue domain. 
19h may be slightly slower becauseour unification recurses twice on a graph: once to unify and once to copy, whereas in incremental unification schemes copying is performed dur- ing the same recursion as unifying. Additional bookkeeping for incremental copying and an additional set-difference op- eration (i.e, complementarcs(dgl,dg2)) during unify2 may offset this, however. 
'Unifs' represents the total number of unifications dur- ing a parse (the number of calls to the top-level 'unify- dg', and not 'unifyl'). 'USrate' represents the ratio of successful unifications to the total number of uni- fications. We parsed each sentence three times on a Symbolics 3620 using both unification methods and took the shortest elapsed time for both methods ('T' represents our scheme, 'W' represents Wroblewski's algorithm with a modification to handle cycles and variables2°). Data structures are the same for both uni- fication algorithms (except for additional fields for a node in our algorithm, i.e., comp-arc-list, comp-arc- mark, and forward-mark). Same functions are used to interface with Earley's parser and the same subfunc- tions are used wherever possible (such as creation and access of arcs) to minimize the differences that are not purely algorithmic. 'Number of copies' represents the number of nodes created during each parse (and does not include the number of arc structures that are cre- ated during a parse). 'Number of conses' represents the amount of structure words consed during a parse. This number represents the real comparison of the amount of space being consumed by each unification algorithm 0ncluding added fields for nodes in our algorithm and arcs that are created in both algorithms). 
We used Earley's parsing algorithm for the experi- ment. The Japanese grammar is based on HPSG anal- ysis ([Pollard and Sag, 1987]) covering phenomena such as coordination, case adjunction, adjuncts, con- trol, slash categories, zero-pronouns, interrogatives, WH constructs, and some pragmatics (speaker, hearer relations, politeness, etc.) ([Yoshimoto and Kogure, 1989]). The grammar covers many of the important linguistic phenomena in conversational Japanese. The grammar graphs which are converted from the path equations contain 2324 nodes. We used 16 sentences from a sample telephone conversation dialog which range from very short sentences (one word, i.e., iie 'no') to relatively long ones (such as soredehakochi-rakarasochiranitourokuyoushiwoookuriitashimasu " In 
that case, we [speaker] will send you [hearer] the reg- istration form.'). Thus, the number of (top-level) uni- fications per sentence varied widely (from 6 to over 
500). 

~Cycles can be handled in Wroblewski's algorithm by checking whether an arc with the same label already exists when arcs are added to a node. And ff such an arc already exists, we destructively unify the node which is the destina- tion of the existing arc with the node which is the destination of the arc being added. If such an arc does not exist, we simply add the arc. ([Kogure, 1989]). Thus, cycles can be handled very cheaply in Wroblewski's algorithm. Handling variables in Wroblewski's algorithm is basically the same as in our algorithm (i.e., Pereira's scheme), and the addition of this functionality can be ignored in terms of comparison to our algorithm. Our algorithm does not require any additional scheme to handle cycles in input dgs. 
sent#  Unifs  USrate  Elapsed time(sec)  Num of Copies  Num of Conses  
T  W  T  W  T  W  
1  6  0.5  1.066  1 113  85  107  1231  1451  
2  i01  0.35  1.897  2 899  1418  2285  15166  23836  
3  24  0.33  1.206  1 290  129  220  1734  2644  
4  71  0.41  3.349  4 102  1635  2151  17133  22943  
5  305  0.39  12.151  17 309  5529  9092  57405  93035  
6  59  0.38  1.254  1 601  608  997  6873  10763  
7  6  0.38  1.016  1 030  85  107  1175  1395  
8  81  0.39  3.499  4 452  1780  2406  18718  24978  
9  480  0.38  18.402  34 653  9466  15756  96985  167211  
i0  555  0.39  26.933  47 224  11789  18822  119629  189997  
ii  109  0.40  4.592  5 433  2047  2913  21871  30531  
12  428  0.38  13.728  24 350  7933  13363  81536  135808  
13  559  0.38  15.480  42 357  9976  17741  102489  180169  
14  52  0.38  1.977  2 410  745  941  8272  10292  
15  77  0.39  3.574  4 688  1590  2137  16946  22416  
16  77  0.39  3.658  4 431  1590  2137  16943  22413  

Table 1: Comparison of our algorithm with Wroblewski's 
4. 	Discussion: Comparison to Other Approaches 
The control structure of our algorithm is identical to that of [Pereira, 1985]. However, instead of stor- ing changes to the argument (lags in the environment we store the changes in the (lags themselves non-destructively. Because we do not use the environment, the log(d) overhead (where d is the number of nodes in a dag) associated with Pereira's scheme that is re- quired during node access (to assemble the whole dag from the skeleton and the updates in the environment) is avoided in our scheme. We share the principle of storing changes in a restorable way with [Karttunen, 1986]'s reversible unification and copy graphs only after a successful unification. Karttunen originally introduced this scheme in order to replace the less efficient structure-sharing implementations ([Pereira, 1985], [Karttunen and Kay, 1985]). In Karttunen's method 21, whenever a destructive change is about to be made, the attribute value pairs 22 stored in the body of the node are saved into an array. The dag node struc- ture itself is also saved in another array. These values are restored after the top level unification is completed. (A copy is made prior to the restoration operation if the unification was a successful one.) The difference between Karttunen's method and ours is that in our al- gorithm, one increment to the global counter can invali- date all the changes made to nodes, while in Karttunen's algorithm each node in the entire argument graph that has been destructively modified must be restored sep- arately by retrieving the attribute-values saved in an 
21Thediscussion ofKartunnen's method is based on the D- PATR implementation on Xerox 1100 machines ([Karttunen, 1986]). 
~'Le., arc structures: 'label' and 'value' pairs in our vocabulary. 
array and resetting the values into the dag structure skeletons saved in another array. In both Karttunen's and our algorithm, there will be a non-destructive (re- versible, and quasi-destructive) saving of intersection arcs that may be wasted when a subgraph of a partic- ular node successfully unifies but the final unification fails due to a failure in some other part of the argument graphs. This is not a problem in our method because the temporary change made to a node is performed as push- ing pointers into already existing structures (nodes) and it does not require entirely new structures to be created and dynamically allocated memory (which was neces- sary for the copy (create-node) operation), z3 [Godden, 1990] presents a method of using lazy evaluation in unification which seems to be one SUCC~sful actual- ization of [Karttunen and Kay, 1985]'s lazy evaluation idea. One question about lazy evaluation is that the ef- ficiency of lazy evaluation varies depending upon the particular hardware and programming language envi- ronment. For example, in CommonLisp, to attain a lazy evalaa_tion, as soon as a function is delayed, a clo- sure (or a structure) needs to be created receiving a dy- namic allocation of memory Oust as in creating a copy node). Thus, there is a shift of memory and associated 
computation consumed from making copies to making closures. In terms of memory cells saved, although the lazy scheme may reduce the total number of copies created, if we consider the memory consumed to create 
closures, the saving may be significantly canceled. In terms of speed, since delayed evaluation requires addi- tional bookkeeping, how schemes such as the one in- troduced by [Godden, 1990] would compare with non- lazy incremental copying schemes is an open question. Unfortunately Godden offers a comparison of his algo-
Z3Although, in Karttunen's method it may become rather expensive ff the arrays require resizing during the saving operation of the subgraphs. 
rithm with one that uses a full copying method (i.e. his Eager Copying) which is already significantly slower than Wroblewski's algorithm. However, no compari- son is offered with prevailing unification schemes such as Wroblewski's. With the complexity for lazy evalu- ation and the memory consumed for delayed closures added, it is hard to estimate whether lazy unification runs considerably faster than Wroblewski's incremen- tal copying scheme, ~ 




5. Conclusion 
The algorithm introduced in this paper runs signifi- cantly faster than Wroblewski's algorithm using Ear- ley's parser and an HPSG based grammar developed at ATR. The gain comes from the fact that our algo- rithm does not create any over copies or early copies. In Wroblewski's algorithm, although over copies are essentially avoided, early copies (by our definition) are a significant problem because about 60 percent of unifications result in failure in a successful parse in our sample parses. The additional set-difference oper- ation required for incremental copying during unify2 may also be contributing to the slower speed of Wrob- lewski's algorithm. Given that our sample grammar is relatively small, we would expect that the difference in the performance between the incremental copying schemes and ours will expand as the grammar size increases and both the number of failures ~ and the size of the wasted subgraphs of failed unifications be- come larger. Since our algorithm is essentially paral- lel, patallelization is one logical choice to pursue fur- ther speedup. Parallel processes can be continuously created as unifyl reeurses deeper and deeper without creating any copies by simply looking for a possible failure of the unification (and preparing for successive copying in ease unification succeeds). So far, we have completed a preliminary implementation on a shared memory parallel hardware with about 75 percent of effective parallelization rate. With the simplicity of our algorithm and the ease of implementing it (com- pared to both incremental copying schemes and lazy schemes), combined with the demonstrated speed of the algorithm, the algorithm could be a viable alterna- tive to existing unification algorithms used in current 
~That is, unless some new scheme for reducing exces- sive copying is introduced such as scucture-sharing of an unchanged shared-forest ([Kogure, 1990]). Even then, our criticism of the cost of delaying evaluation would still be valid. Also, although different in methodology from the way suggested by Kogure for Wroblewski's algorithm, it is possi- ble to at~in structure-sharing of an unchanged forest in our scheme as well. We have already developed a preliminary version of such a scheme which is not discussed in this paper. 
Z~For example, in our large-scale speech-to-speech trans- lation system under development, the USrate is estimated to be under 20%, i.e., over 80% of unifications are estimated to be failures. 
natural language systems. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to thank Akira Kurematsu, Tsuyoshi Morimoto, Hitoshi Iida, Osamu Furuse, Masaaki Nagata, Toshiyuki Takezawa and other mem- bers of ATR and Masaru Tomita and Jaime Carbonell at CMU. Thanks are also due to Margalit Zabludowski and Hiroaki Kitano for comments on the final version of this paper and Takako Fujioka for assistance in im- plementing the parallel version of the algorithm. 

Appendix: Implementation 
The unification algorithms, Farley parser and the HPSG path equation to graph converter programs are implemented in CommonLisp on a Symbolics ma- chine. The preliminary parallel version of our uni- fication algorithm is currently implemented on a Se- quent/Symmetry closely-coupled shared-memory par- allel machine running Allegro CLiP parallel Common- Lisp. 


References 
[Godden, 1990] Godden, K. "Lazy Unification" In Proceed-ings of ACL-90, 1990. 
[Karttunen, 1986] Karttunen, L. "D-PATR: A Development Environment for Unificadon-Based Grammars". In Pro-ceedingsofCOLING-86, 1986. (Also, Report CSLL86-61 Stanford University). 
[Karttunen and Kay, 1985] Karttunen, L. and M. Kay "Structure Sharing with Binary Trees". In Proceedings of ACL-85, 1985. 
[Kasper, 1987] Kasper, R. "A Unification Method for Dis- junctive Feature Descriptions'. In ProceedingsofACL-87, 1987. 
[Kogure, 1989] Kogure, K. A Study on Feature Structures and Unification. ATR Technical Report. TR-1-0032,1988. 
[Kogure, 1990] Kogure, K. "Strategic Lazy Incremental Copy Graph Unification". In Proceedings of COLING-90, 1990. 
[Pereira, 1985] Pereira, E "A Structure-Sharing Represen- tation for Unificadon-Based Grammar Formalisms". In Proceedings of ACL-85, 1985. 
[Pollard and Sag, 1987] Pollard, C. and I. Sag Information-based Syntax and Semantics. Vol 1, CSLI, 1987. 
[Yoshimoto and Kogure, 1989] Yoshimoto, K. and K. Kogure Japanese Sentence Analysis by means of Phrase Structure Grammar. ATR Technical Report. TR-1-0049, 1989. 
[Wroblewski, 1987] Wroblewski, D."Nondestrucdve Graph Unification" In Proceedings of AAAI87, 1987. 



