In his most candid remarks yet on the economy, European Central Bank President Wim Duisenberg said Friday that growth appears to be slowing in the 11 countries adopting the EU common currency or euro on Jan. 1.
In a surprise move, nations adopting the new European currency, the euro, dropped key interest rates Thursday, effectively setting the rate that will be adopted throughout the euro zone on Jan. 1.
Making their first collective decision about monetary policy, the 11 European nations launching a common currency on Jan. 1 cut interest rates Thursday in a surprise move that won market confidence.
China made trading in the euro official Monday, announcing authorization for the European common currency's use in trade and financial dealings starting Jan. 1.
Two days before the new euro currency goes into effect for 11 European Union members, a growing number of Danes believe their country should take part, according to a poll published Tuesday.
The annual inflation rate in the 11 nations that adopt the euro as their shared currency on Jan. 1 fell to 0.9 percent in November, the European Union's statistics agency reported Wednesday.
Wim Duisenberg, the head of the new European Central Bank, said in an interview published Wednesday that he won't step down after completing half his term as earlier agreed.
Europe's dream of monetary union becomes reality Thursday when 11 nations irrevocably lock their currencies together to form the euro and create an economic giant whose boundaries stretch from beyond the Arctic Circle to the shores of the Mediterranean.
Struggling to avoid being sidelined in the Continent-wide equities market promised by Europe's soon-to-be-introduced single currency, French authorities said Thursday that the Paris stock exchange would join an alliance between London and Frankfurt that is seen as the precursor of a pan-European market.
Palm Pilot in one hand, cellular phone in the other, Jean-Marc Routiers, 26, was juggling business calls halfway between London and Paris.
