BRUSSELS, Belgium( AP) U.S. special envoy Richard Holbrooke said Monday the military situation in Kosovo was as bad now as two weeks ago.
The United States and Russia are ratcheting up the pressure on President Slobodan Milosevic, warning that NATO airstrikes are inevitable unless he takes decisive action soon to end the humanitarian crisis in the southern Serbian province.
The United States and Russia are ratcheting up the pressure on President Slobodan Milosevic, warning that NATO airstrikes are inevitable unless he takes decisive action soon to end the humanitarian crisis in the southern Serbian province.
The United States and Russia are ratcheting up the pressure on Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, warning that NATO airstrikes are inevitable unless he takes decisive action to end the crisis in Kosovo province.
With the threat of NATO attack mounting, Yugoslavia's prime minister warned Monday the nation faces the immiment danger of war and claimed the government was taking steps to comply with international demands for peace in Kosovo.
With the threat of NATO attack mounting, Yugoslavia's prime minister warned Monday the nation faces the imminent danger of war and claimed the government is taking steps to comply with international demands for peace in Kosovo.
With NATO attacks said to be only days away, top U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke delivered an 11th-hour warning Monday to Yugoslavia's president to halt his crackdown on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo or face airstrikes.
With NATO attacks said to be only days away, top U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke delivered a last-minute warning Monday to Yugoslavia's president to halt his crackdown on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo or face airstrikes.
Under NATO threat to end his punishing offensive against ethnic Albanian separatists in Kosovo, President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia has ordered most units of his army back to their barracks and may well avoid an attack by the alliance, military observers and diplomats say.
The American envoy Richard Holbrooke met with President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia Monday night and according to American diplomats told him that he had to take further steps to pull back his military in Kosovo Province or face a NATO attack.
