Dialogue tagsets in oncology 
Mary McGee Wood 
Department of Computer Science University of Manchester Manchester M13 9PL U.K. mary@cs.man.ac.uk 
Abstract 
Dialogue analysis is widely used in oncol­ogy for training health professionals in communication skills. Parameters and tagsets have been developed indepen­dently of work in natural language pro­cessing. In relation to emergent stan­dards in NLP, syntactic tagging is mini­mal, semantics is domain-speci.c, prag­matics is comparable, and the analysis of cognitive a.ect is richly developed. We suggest productive directions for conver­gence. 
1 Motivation 
Dialogue analysis systems have been developed in oncology as a tool for assessing and improv­ing the communication skills of health profession­als. Rates of psychiatric morbidity (clinical anxi­ety and depression) in cancer patients are lowered when health professionals have adequate commu­nication skills to discover and address the patients’ concerns and worries. Health professionals inter­viewing patients sometimes exhibit negative be­haviours, such as “blocking” a certain line of in­vestigation rather than encouraging the patient to describe his or her problem. On the other hand, a skilled interviewer uses active interven­tions to direct the progress of the interview, as well as more passive responses. Several oncology research groups have demonstrated that these pat­terns can be detected and quanti.ed through anal­ysis of conversations between health professionals and patients. This in turn can form a basis for more e.ective training in communication skills. 
The Psychological Medicine Group at Manch­ester (PMG), funded by the Cancer Research Campaign (CRC), is a leading group in dialogue analysis in oncology. This paper describes the parameters and tagsets (analogous to “Dialogue Act” tagging (Stolcke et al 2000)), which they and three other groups have developed for this highly specialised domain. 
This domain o.ers an interesting contrast to the “instructional” or “service” dialogues commonly studied. The health professional is the “expert” in the conventional sense, and at times conveys med­ical information to the less knowledgeable patient in a conventional way. At other times, the patient should be seen as the “expert” with regard to his or her own perceived physical and mental condi­tion, and the task of the health professional is ef­fectively that of “knowledge elicitation” as under­stood in expert systems development. This .exi­ble and dynamic shifting of participants’ roles in a dialogue poses an interesting challenge, compared to the clearly de.ned and static roles assumed in much work in dialogue analysis. 
2 Parameters for dialogue tagging 
Complete and accurate tagging of dialogue must encode a number of independent aspects of each utterance. These are represented as “layers” in the DAMSL system (Core & Allen 1997). Form-based tags (question, statement) are sup­plemented with diacritics indicating other types of information, such as task-management or communication-management. 
The four oncology dialogue tagging systems considered here all share this basic principle, al­though they di.er in the speci.cs. Butow et al (1995:1115) cite the recognition as early as 1983 of “layers of meaning ... such as the con­tent, the process, the emotion and the purpose”. Their own CN-LOGIT system encodes three “di­mensions”: “source” (who is speaking), “process” (questions, responses, initiated statements), and “content”. A complete dialogue can be mapped into a three-dimensional information space, and measures can be applied such as how much time was spent in each cell of the cube. Ong et al (1998) use the Roter Interaction Analysis Sys­tem (RIAS). Each utterance in a dialogue is cat­egorised, and also rated on .ve distinct “global a.ect” scales. The Medical Interaction Process System (MIPS) of Ford et al (2000) also stresses the multi-dimensional nature of dialogue annota­tion, using .fteen “content codes” and eight “af­fective modes”. PMG (Maguire & Faulkner 1988; Maguire p.c.) have separate tagsets for Form, Function, Content, Level, Cue, Cue Management, Blocking, and Focus. 
One can see an implicit consensus here that (to use NLP terms) syntactic form, overt semantic content, pragmatic force, and cognitive a.ect are distinct and are all signi.cant. The di.ering de­grees of detail and prominence they receive in the di.erent systems are discussed under those head­ings in the next section. 
3 Dialogue tagsets 
Not surprisingly, the actual tagsets developed in oncology re.ect their domain more closely than the parameter sets do. In comparison with NLP work, syntactic classi.cation is minimal and func­tionally oriented, while communication manage­ment and psychological / emotional loading re­ceive prominent, .ne-grained analysis. 
3.1 Form 
Although all four oncology systems encode the form of an utterance in some way, the classi.ca­tions have a strong pragmatic bias. Questions are distinguished, not in traditional syntactic terms as yes-no or wh-, but according to their e.ect on the .ow of the dialogue. The simplest set is that of Butow et al: Open Question, Closed Question, Response to Question, Statement, Other. PMG add Directive Question (open), Directive Question (closed), Screening Question, Leading Question, Multiple Question. 
Ford et al distinguish “modes” from “con­tent codes”, but even the modes encode coarse-grained content information as well as a.ective classi.cation. The form categories of Ong et al are “instrumental” (Directions, Question-asking, Information-giving, &c), and they specify that “if a decision must be made between categorizing an utterance in an instrumental or a.ect category, the a.ect category should be used” -quite rea­sonably, given the purpose of their analysis. 
Even with a prior commitment to maintaining separate and independent levels of analysis, some leakage between levels can occur. (The set of forty-two Dialogue Act labels used by Stolcke et al (2000) shows some similar mixing of levels, includ­ing both purely syntactic tags (such as Declarative Yes-No Question) and a.ective tags (such as Ap­preciation).) 

3.2 Content 
The content of an utterance is also encoded in all four systems, and the tagsets on this level are the most domain-speci.c. Butow et al cite seven con­tent categories: Treatment, Diagnosis, Prognosis, History, Other medical matters, Social matters. 
Ford et al, with 15 content codes, and PMG, with 38, are the most fully developed. Both include Medical (further distinguished by PMG, with four categories for diagnosis and two for prog­nosis), Treatment, Psychological, Social, Lifestyle, &c. PMG are particularly detailed in their cat­egories for psychological and emotional issues, shading into the a.ect level: Concerns, Feelings, Emotions, Religion, &c. Again, this is what one would expect, given that their reason for carry­ing out the analysis is to assess the health pro­fessional’s success in getting the patient to talk about exactly these issues. 
Both Ford and PMG also include the opening and closing of the interview under this heading, where it sits oddly. A separate level of commu­nication management, as in DAMSL, would ac­commodate these and the open/ closed/ directive question distinction currently made in the Form tagsets, clarifying all three. 

3.3 Pragmatics 
As noted above, the Form classes used in the four coding schemes express more pragmatic than syn­tactic information. Ong et al’s “instrumental clus­ters and categories” (Directions, Question-ask­ing, Information-giving, Counselling) can be con­sidered pragmatic. So can PMG’s “Function” codes: eliciting, checking, acknowledgement (psy­chological, general, cognitions); reassurance, ne­gotiation, information giving. These are similar to some of the Dialogue Act labels used in NLP work: Stolcke et al’s (2000) agreement, response acknowledgement, summarize, or VERBMOBIL’s suggest, con.rm, clarify (Jekat et al 1995). 

3.4 A.ect 
Cognitive a.ect -the psychological force, for a patient, of an utterance or a complete dialogue ­is the focus of interest in oncology and thus the most highly developed area. Ford et al pick out eight of their “modes” as a.ective, including the expression of irritation, gratitude, apology, and concern. 
Ong et al rate both doctor and patient, by cod­ing their utterances, on .ve distinct “global a.ect” scales: Anger/ irritation, Anxiety/ nervousness, Dominance/ assertiveness, Interest/ engagement, Friendliness/ warmth. Their “a.ective clusters and categories” comprise (with subheadings) so­cial behaviour, verbal attentiveness, showing con­cern, and negative talk. 
PMG do not represent a.ect as a separate pa­rameter, as such. Their function codes include a.ective functions such as Empathy and Reassur­ance. Many of their content codes can also repre­sent a.ect, as noted above. Topics such as Con­cerns, Feelings about health care, Religion / spiri­tual issues can be addressed at any level from sim­ply factual to deeply emotional, blurring the pic­ture: this would be clari.ed if the a.ect level were explicitly factored out. The most direct represen­tation of a.ective level comes in the two codes Psychological explicit and Psychological implicit. Each utterance in a dialogue can be given several content codes, commonly including one of these two, as seen in the sample dialogue below. 
Cognitive a.ect has barely been touched on by NLP research in dialogue tagging. It is clearly more subtle and di.cult than syntactic, seman­tic, or pragmatic analysis, and also less signi.cant in instructional or service dialogues than in the highly charged, life-critical domain of cancer care. It is, however, an important aspect of dialogue and speaker modelling, and of the design of appropri­ate responses. In this area, NLP could learn some valuable lessons from oncology. 
4 An example 
Here is a brief typical example from a PMG anno­tated dialogue. Notice the multiple and somewhat diverse content codes, and the classi.cation of cue management (somewhat counter-intuitively attached to the cue utterance itself, not the response). 
P26: I said there’s only another thing that I hope I never have to have and that’s selectron treatment. 
Content: 23 (Psychological implicit) 
24 (Treatment) Level: 1 (Hint) Cue: 1 (Patient cue) Cue management: 4 (Cue explored) 
N27: Mmmm. 
Form: 02 (Response) 
Function: 06 (Acknowledgement -general) 
Content: 24 (Psychological implicit) 

P27: But I says ... ... if I have to I will do, I said whatever you say, I said. 
Content: 24 (Treatment) 14 (Information) 
N28: Now why did you say that about selectron? 
Form: 04 (Open directive question) Function: 04 (Clari.cation -general) Content: 24 (Treatment) 
P28: No it were me that said that. 
Content: 24 (Treatment) 
N29: Right, 
Form: 02 (Response) 
Function: 06 (Acknowledgement -general) 
Content: 24 (Treatment) 

have you had it before? 
Form: 05 (Directive question (closed) Function: 04 (Clari.cation -general) Content: 24 (Treatment) 
13 (History) 
P29: I said, I, I don’t mind what you do but I hope I’ve never to have selectron treatment again, but I said if I have to, if it’s a necessity then I will. 
Content: 23 (Psychological implicit) 24 (Treatment) 33 (The future) 
Level: 1 (Hint) 
Cue: 1 (Patient cue) 
Cue management: 2 (Minimal acknowledgement) 

N30: Right. 
Form: 02 (Response) 
Function: 06 (Acknowledgement -general) 
Content: 24 (Treatment) 

14 (Information) 
P30: But I hope I never have. 
Content: 23 (Psychological implicit) 24 (Treatment) 33 (The future) 
Level: 1 (Hint) 
Cue: 1 (Patient cue) 
Cue management: 4 (Cue explored) 

N31: And why was that, because you were isolated or what was it....? 
Form: 08 (Multiple question) 
Function: 03 (Clari.cation -psychological) 
Content: 23 (Psychological implicit) 

24 (Treatment) 
5 Implementations 
All the dialogue tagging work in oncology has been done manually. A few primitive software tools have been developed to support the tagging pro­cess and to analyse the results. 
Ong et al (1998) have developed a Turbo Pas­cal “computerized version” of the RIAS coding system. The advantages they claim for it give one some idea of average state of its .eld: 
“With this program, classi.cation of utterances can be done directly on computer. As a result, the extra step of entering paper and pencil data into the computer is omitted. Also, sequential in­formation is kept. Moreover, because the ten last classi.cations are constantly visible on the screen there is direct feedback about the ongoing conver­sation. This provides an important memory aid with respect to which utterance has to be coded next. As a consequence, the task becomes less at­tention demanding and therefore less error-prone. By giving the opportunity to save the content of the last coded utterance, an additional memory aid is provided for shorter and longer breaks.” (Ong et al 1998:400) 
Butow’s group have developed a “computer­based interaction analysis system” with three parts: “(i) micro level analysis coded in real time and retaining the sequence of events, (ii) event counts and (iii) macro level analysis of consulta­tion style and a.ect” (Butow et al 1995:1116). “At the micro level the aim is to break the consul­tation down into its components and to charac­terise, count and/or time them... At the macro level, the aim is to characterise the consulta­tion in a more holistic way, such as patient­centred vs doctor-centred, authoritarian vs a.l­iative or friendly vs hostile.” (ibid:1115) All three forms of analysis depend on counting and timing utterance-events classi.ed according to the three-dimensional model described above, although Bu-tow et al stress that they also “retain the sequence of events”. “In future analyses we will explore se­quential information e.ects” (ibid:1120). This is evidently a signi.cant innovation in its .eld. The fundamental concept of a grammar of dialogue is simply missing from the oncology work. On the other hand, their techniques for “macro-level” analysis of dialogues may well have something to o.er, especially in the subtle areas of modelling and adapting to speakers’ attitudes and underly­ing intentions. 
6 Prospects 
All this work has been developed with care, in the light of experience, to serve a speci.c and unusual purpose. However, it shows no awareness of dia­logue tagging work in NLP. Both .elds can bene.t from collaboration. 
The author, together with Prof. Peter Maguire of PMG, has recently been granted support by CRC to develop practical software support for the PMG oncology dialogue annotators. This paper presents a preliminary analysis, part of a feasibility study for that project. An associated PhD studentship, awarded by the University of Manchester Department of Computer Science, ensures that the NLP perspective will be rep­resented and the theoretical issues addressed. We look forward to presenting more detailed analyses, and original proposals, in the future. 
Acknowledgments 
Prof. Peter Maguire and Ian Fletcher of PMG have been generous with their time and support in the research leading to this paper. We also gratefully acknowledge the support of the Can­cer Research Campaign and of the Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester. 
References 
Butow, PN, SM Dunn, MHN Tattersall, & Q. J. Jones. 1995. Computer-based interaction analy­sis of the cancer consultation. British Journal of Cancer 71:1115-1121. 
Core, M. & J Allen. 1997. Coding Dialogs with the DAMSL annotation scheme. AAAI fall sym­posium on Communicative Action in Humans and Machines. 
Ford, S, A Hall, D Ratcli.e, & L Fallow.eld. 2000. The Medical Interaction Process System (MIPS): an instrument for analysing interviews of oncologists and patients with cancer. Social Sci­ence and Medicine 50:553-566. 
Jekat, S, A Klein, E Maier, I Maleck, M Mast, & J Quantz. 1995. Dialogue acts in VERBMOBIL. Verbmobil-Report 65, Universitat Hamburg et al. 
Maguire, P & A Faulkner. 1988. How to im­prove the counselling skills of doctors and nurses in cancer care. British Journal of Medicine 297, 
847. 
Ong, LML, MRM Visser, IPM Kruyver, JM Bensing, A van den Brink-Muinen, JML Stouthard, FB Lammes & JCJM de Haes. 1998. The Roter Interaction Analysis System (RIAS) in Oncological Consultations: Psychometric Proper­ties. Psycho-Oncology 7:387-401. 
Stolcke, A, K Ries, N Coccaro, E. Shriberg, R Bates, D Jurafsky, P Taylor, R Martin, C van Ess-Dykema, & M Meteer. 2000. Dialogue Act Mod­elling for Automatic Tagging and Recognition of Conversational Speech. Computational Linguis­tics 26(3):339-373. 



