Torturers and bombers who carried out atrocities defending or fighting apartheid need counseling to ensure they do not repeat their crimes, an expert for South Africa's reconciliation body said Thursday.
A panel probing apartheid-era abuses has accused the African National Congress of human rights violations, including torture and bomb attacks, the state broadcaster said Monday.
The institution exploring apartheid's horrors will issue a report that finds the African National Congress shares blame for human rights violations as it struggled to overcome white rule.
A panel investigating apartheid-era atrocities said Wednesday it will not implicate the last apartheid president, F.W.
President Nelson Mandela acknowledged Saturday the African National Congress violated human rights during apartheid, setting him at odds with his deputy president over a report that has divided much of South Africa.
Criminal prosecutions for atrocities committed during the war against white rule could drag on for at least six years, a top prosecutor said Monday.
Facing a court challenge, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission said Wednesday that it would withhold, at least temporarily, the parts of its final report that implicate South Africa's last apartheid-era president, F.W.
Following are excerpts from the final report issued by South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission on Thursday : PRIMARY FINDING On the basis of the evidence available to it, the primary finding of the Commission is that : The predominant portion of gross violations of human rights was committed by the former state through its security and law-enforcement agencies.
The New York Times said in an editorial on Sunday, Nov. 1 : The 3,500-page report of the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission, released on Thursday, is the most comprehensive and unsparing examination of a nation's ugly past that any such commission has yet produced.
The deal that South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission offered was simple enough : Confess your crimes, apply for amnesty and you will go free.
