Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages 126?129,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Voting between Dictionary-based and Subword Tagging Models for
Chinese Word Segmentation
Dong Song and Anoop Sarkar
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A1S6
{dsong,anoop}@cs.sfu.ca
Abstract
This paper describes a Chinese word seg-
mentation system that is based on ma-
jority voting among three models: a for-
ward maximum matching model, a con-
ditional random field (CRF) model us-
ing maximum subword-based tagging, and
a CRF model using minimum subword-
based tagging. In addition, it contains a
post-processing component to deal with
inconsistencies. Testing on the closed
track of CityU, MSRA and UPUC corpora
in the third SIGHAN Chinese Word Seg-
mentation Bakeoff, the system achieves a
F-score of 0.961, 0.953 and 0.919, respec-
tively.
1 Introduction
Tokenizing input text into words is the first step of
any text analysis task. In Chinese, a sentence is
written as a string of characters, to which we shall
refer by their traditional name of hanzi, without
separations between words. As a result, before any
text analysis on Chinese, word segmentation task
has to be completed so that each word is ?isolated?
by the word-boundary information.
Participating in the third SIGHAN Chinese
Word Segmentation Bakeoff in 2006, our system
is tested on the closed track of CityU, MSRA and
UPUC corpora. The sections below provide a de-
tailed description of the system and our experi-
mental results.
2 System Description
In our segmentation system, a hybrid strategy
is applied (Figure 1): First, forward maximum
matching (Chen and Liu, 1992), which is a
dictionary-based method, is used to generate a
segmentation result. Also, the CRF model us-
ing maximum subword-based tagging (Zhang et
al., 2006) and the CRF model using minimum
subword-based tagging, both of which are statis-
tical methods, are used individually to solve the
problem. In the next step, the solutions from
these three methods are combined via the hanzi-
level majority voting algorithm. Then, a post-
processing procedure is applied in order to to get
the final output. This procedure merges adjoin-
ing words to match the dictionary entries and then
splits words which are inconsistent with entries in
the training corpus.
Forward
Post?processing
Majority Voting
Result
Input Sentence
Tagging
Subword?based
Minimum
CRF with
Tagging
Subword?based
Maximum
CRF with
Matching
Maximum
Figure 1: Outline of the segmentation process
2.1 Forward Maximum Matching
The maximum matching algorithm is a greedy
segmentation approach. It proceeds through the
sentence, mapping the longest word at each point
with an entry in the dictionary. In our system,
the well-known forward maximum matching algo-
rithm (Chen and Liu, 1992) is implemented.
The maximum matching approach is simple and
efficient, and it results in high in-vocabulary ac-
curacy; However, the small size of the dictionary,
which is obtained only from the training data, is
a major bottleneck for this approach to be applied
by itself.
126
2.2 CRF Model with Maximum
Subword-based Tagging
Conditional random fields (CRF), a statistical se-
quence modeling approach (Lafferty et al, 2001),
has been widely applied in various sequence
learning tasks including Chinese word segmen-
tation. In this approach, most existing methods
use the character-based IOB tagging. For ex-
ample, ??(all) ??(extremely important)?
is labeled as ??(all)/O ?(until)/B (close)/I
?(heavy)/I(demand)/I?.
Recently (Zhang et al, 2006) proposed a maxi-
mum subword-based IOB tagger for Chinese word
segmentation, and our system applies their ap-
proach which obtains a very high accuracy on the
shared task data from previous SIGHAN compe-
titions. In this method, all single-hanzi words and
the top frequently occurring multi-hanzi words are
extracted from the training corpus to form the lexi-
con subset. Then, each word in the training corpus
is segmented for IOB tagging, with the forward
maximum matching algorithm, using the formed
lexicon subset as the dictionary. In the above
example, the tagging labels become ??(all)/O
?(until)/B (close)/I ?(important)/I?, as-
suming that ??(important)? is the longest sub-
word in this word, and it is one of the top fre-
quently occurring words in the training corpus.
After tagging the training corpus, we use the
package CRF++1 to train the CRF model. Sup-
pose w0 represents the current word, w?1 is the
first word to the left, w?2 is the second word to
the left, w1 is the first word to the right, and w2
is the second word to the right, then in our experi-
ments, the types of unigram features used include
w0, w?1, w1, w?2, w2, w0w?1, w0w1, w?1w1,
w?2w?1, and w2w0. In addition, only combina-
tions of previous observation and current observa-
tion are exploited as bigram features.
2.3 CRF Model with Minimum
Subword-based Tagging
In our third model, we applies a similar approach
as in the previous section. However, instead of
finding the maximum subwords, we explore the
minimum subwords. At the beginning, we build
the dictionary using the whole training corpus.
Then, for each word in the training data, a forward
shortest matching is used to get the sequence of
minimum-length subwords, and this sequence is
1available from http://www/chasen.org/?taku/software
tagged in the same IOB format as before. Suppose
?a?, ?ac?, ?de? and ?acde? are the only entries in
the dictionary. Then, for the word ?acde?, the se-
quence of subwords is ?a?, ?c? and ?de?, and the
tags assigned to ?acde? are ?a/B c/I de/I?.
After tagging the training data set, CRF++
package is executed again to train this type of
model, using the identical unigram and bigram
feature sets that are used in the previous model.
Meanwhile, the unsegmented test data is seg-
mented by the forward shortest matching algo-
rithm. After this initial segmentation process, the
result is fed into the trained CRF model for re-
segmentation by assigning IOB tags.
2.4 Majority Voting
Having the segmentation results from the above
three models in hand, in this next step, we adopt
the hanzi-level majority voting algorithm. First,
for each hanzi in a segmented sentence, we tag it
either as ?B? if it is the first hanzi of a word or
a single-hanzi word, or as ?I? otherwise. Then,
for a given hanzi in the results from those three
models, if at least two of the models provide the
identical tag, it will be assigned that tag. For in-
stance, suppose ?a c de? is the segmentation result
via forward maximum matching, and it is also the
result from CRF model with maximum subword-
based tagging, and ?ac d e? is the result from the
third model. Then, for ?a?, since all of them as-
sign ?B? to it, ?a? is given the ?B? tag; for ?c?,
because two of segmentations tag it as ?B?, ?c? is
given the ?B? tag as well. Similarly, the tag for
each remaining hanzi is determined by this major-
ity voting process, and we get ?a c de? as the result
for this example.
To test the performance of each of the three
models and that of the majority voting, we di-
vide the MSRA corpus into training set and held-
out set. Throughout all the experiments we con-
ducted, we discover that those two CRF models
perform much better than the pure hanzi-based
CRF method, and that the voting process improves
the performance further.
2.5 Post-processing
While analyzing errors with the segmentation re-
sult from the held-out set, we find two incon-
sistency problems: First, the inconsistency be-
tween the dictionary and the result: that is, certain
words that appear in the dictionary are separated
into consecutive words in the test result; Second,
127
the inconsistency among words in the dictionary;
For instance, both ?)????(scientific research)
and ?)?(science)??(research)? appear in the
training corpus.
To deal with the first phenomena, for the seg-
mented result, we try to merge adjoining words to
match the dictionary entries. Suppose ?a b c de?
are the original voting result, and ?ab?, ?abc? and
?cd? form the dictionary. Then, we merge ?a?, ?b?
and ?c? together to get the longest match with the
dictionary. Therefore, the output is ?abc de?.
For the second problem, we introduce the split
procedure. In our system, we only consider two
consecutive words. First, all bigrams are extracted
from the training corpus, and their frequencies are
counted. After that, for example, if ?a b? appears
more often than ?ab?, then whenever in the test
result we encounter ?ab?, we split it into ?a b?.
The post-processing steps detailed above at-
tempt to maximize the value of known words in
the training data as well as attempting to deal with
the word segmentation inconsistencies in the train-
ing data.
3 Experiments and Analysis
The third International Chinese Language
Processing Bakeoff includes four different cor-
pora, Academia Sinica (CKIP), City University
of Hong Kong (CityU), Microsoft Research
(MSRA), and University of Pennsylvania and
University of Colorado, Boulder (UPUC), for the
word segmentation task.
In this bakeoff, we test our system in CityU,
MSRA and UPUC corpora, and follow the closed
track. That is, we only use training material from
the training data for the particular corpus we are
testing on. No other material or any type of ex-
ternal knowledge is used, including part-of-speech
information, externally generated word-frequency
counts, Arabic and Chinese numbers, feature char-
acters for place names and common Chinese sur-
names.
3.1 Results on SIGHAN Bakeoff 2006
To observe the result of majority voting and the
contribution of the post-processing step, the ex-
periment is ran for each corpus by first producing
the outcome of majority voting and then producing
the output from the post-processing. In each ex-
periment, the precision (P ), recall (R), F-measure
(F ), Out-of-Vocabulary rate (OOV ), OOV recall
rate (ROOV ), and In-Vocabulary rate (RIV ) are
recorded. Table 1,2,3 show the scores for the
CityU corpus, for the MSRA corpus, and for the
UPUC corpus, respectively.
Majority Voting Post-processing
P 0.956 0.958
R 0.962 0.963
F 0.959 0.961
OOV 0.04 0.04
ROOV 0.689 0.689
RIV 0.974 0.974
Table 1: Scores for CityU corpus
Majority Voting Post-processing
P 0.952 0.954
R 0.952 0.952
F 0.952 0.953
OOV 0.034 0.034
ROOV 0.604 0.604
RIV 0.964 0.964
Table 2: Scores for MSRA corpus
Majority Voting Post-processing
P 0.908 0.909
R 0.927 0.929
F 0.918 0.919
OOV 0.088 0.088
ROOV 0.628 0.628
RIV 0.956 0.958
Table 3: Scores for UPUC corpus
From those tables, we can see that a simple ma-
jority voting algorithm produces accuracy that is
higher than each individual system and reason-
ably high F-scores overall. In addition, the post-
processing step indeed helps to improve the per-
formance.
3.2 Error analysis
The errors that occur in our system are mainly due
to the following three factors:
First, there is inconsistency between the gold
segmentation and the training corpus. Although
the inconsistency problem within the training cor-
pus is intended to be tackled in the post-processing
step, we cannot conclude that the segmentation
128
for certain words in the gold test set alays fol-
lows the convention in the training data set. For
example, in the MSRA training corpus, ??)
u?(Chinese government) is usually considered
as a single word; while in the gold test set, it is
separated as two words ??)?(Chinese) and ?u
?(government). This inconsistency issue lowers
the system performance. This problem, of course,
affects all competing systems.
Second, we don?t have specific steps to deal
with words with postfixes such as ?V?(person).
Compared to our system, (Zhang, 2005) proposed
a segmentation system that contains morpholog-
ically derived word recognition post-processing
component to solve this problem. Lacking of such
a step prevents us from identifying certain types
of words such as ???V?(worker) to be a single
word.
In addition, the unknown words are still trou-
blesome because of the limited size of the training
corpora. In the class of unknown words, we en-
counter person names, numbers, dates, organiza-
tion names and words translated from languages
other than Chinese. For example, in the produced
CityU test result, the translated person name ??
-b???(Mihajlovic) is incorrectly separated
as ??-b? and ????. Moreover, in cer-
tain cases, person names can also create ambigu-
ity. Take the name ?B?0?(Qiu, Beifang) in
UPUC test set for example, without understand-
ing the meaning of the whole sentence, it is dif-
ficult even for human to determine whether it is
a person name or it represents ?B?(autumn), ??
0?(north), with the meaning of ?the autumn in the
north?.
4 Alternative to Majority Voting
In designing the voting procedure, we also attempt
to develop and use a segmentation lattice, which
proceeds using a similar underlying principle as
the one applied in (Xu et al, 2005).
In our approach, for an input sentence, the seg-
mentation result using each of our three models is
transformed into an individual lattice. Also, each
edge in the lattice is assigned a particular weight,
according to certain features such as whether or
not the output word from that edge is in the dictio-
nary. After building the three lattices, one for each
model, we merge them together. Then, the shortest
path, referring to the path that has the minimum
weight, is extracted from the merged lattice, and
therefore, the segmentation result is determined by
this shortest path.
However, in the time we had to run our experi-
ments on the test data, we were unable to optimize
the edge weights to obtain high accuracy on some
held-out set from the training corpora. So instead,
we tried a simple method for finding edge weights
by uniformly distributing the weight for each fea-
ture; Nevertheless, by testing on the shared task
data from the 2005 SIGHAN bakeoff, the perfor-
mance is not competitive, compared to our simple
majority voting method described above. As a re-
sult, we decide to abandon this approach for this
year?s SIGHAN bakeoff.
5 Conclusion
Our Chinese word segmentation system is based
on majority voting among the initial outputs from
forward maximum matching, from a CRF model
with maximum subword-based tagging, and from
a CRF model with minimum subword-based tag-
ging. In addition, we experimented with various
steps in post-processing which effectively boosted
the overall performance.
In future research, we shall explore more so-
phisticated ways of voting, including the contin-
uing investigation on the segmentation lattice ap-
proach. Also, more powerful methods on how
to accurately deal with unknown words, including
person and place names, without external knowl-
edge, will be studied as well.
References
Keh-jiann Chen, and Shing-Huan Liu. 1992. Word Identi-
fication for Mandarin Chinese Sentences. In Fifth Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages
101?107.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models
for Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. In Proc. of
ICML-2001, pages 591?598.
Jia Xu, Evgeny Matusov, Richard Zens, and Hermann Ney.
2005. Integrated Chinese Word Segmentation in Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proc. of IWSLT-2005.
Huipeng Zhang, Ting Liu, Jinshan Ma, and Xiantao Liu.
2005. Chinese Word Segmentation with Multiple Post-
processors in HIT-IRLab. In Proceedings of the Fourth
SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing,
pages 172?175.
Ruiqiang Zhang, Genichiro Kikui, and Eiichiro Sumita.
2006. Subword-based Tagging by Conditional Random
Fields for Chinese Word Segmentation. In Proc. of HLT-
NAACL 2006.
129
