Cambodian leader Hun Sen on Friday rejected opposition parties demands for talks outside the country, accusing them of trying to internationalize the political crisis.
King Norodom Sihanouk has declined requests to chair a summit of Cambodia's top political leaders, saying the meeting would not bring any progress in deadlocked negotiations to form a government.
Cambodia's two-party opposition asked the Asian Development Bank Monday to stop providing loans to the incumbent government, which it calls illegal.
Cambodia's ruling party responded Tuesday to criticisms of its leader in the U.S. Congress with a lengthy defense of strongman Hun Sen's human rights record.
Cambodia's leading opposition party ruled out sharing the presidency of Parliament with its arch foe Saturday, insisting it alone must occupy the top position in the legislative body.
Cambodia's bickering political parties broke a three-month deadlock Friday and agreed to a coalition government leaving strongman Hun Sen as sole prime minister, King Norodom Sihanouk announced.
Cambodian politicians expressed hope Monday that a new partnership between the parties of strongman Hun Sen and his rival, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, in a coalition government would not end in more violence.
Cambodian leader Hun Sen has guaranteed the safety and political freedom of all politicians, trying to ease the fears of his rivals that they will be arrested or killed if they return to the country.
Worried that party colleagues still face arrest for their politics, opposition leader Sam Rainsy sought further clarification Friday of security guarantees promised by strongman Hun Sen. Sam Rainsy wrote in a letter to King Norodom Sihanouk that he was eager to attend the first session of the new National Assembly on Nov. 25, but complained that Hun Sen's assurances were not strong enough to ease concerns his party members may be arrested upon their return to Cambodia.
King Norodom Sihanouk on Tuesday praised agreements by Cambodia's top two political parties previously bitter rivals to form a coalition government led by strongman Hun Sen.
