  annotation_naming_convention.txt
  
  About this file:  Describes the naming convention followed to identify annotation files 
  for each training topic in ./data/???-????_TRAIN/Annotation/
  
  Each annotation file consists of the following pipe "|" separated
  fields:

   1: Topic ID: The ACL Anthology ID of the reference paper, which
   serves as the ID for the topic, e.g., "H89-2014_TRAIN"

   2: Citance Number: A numeric ID for the citance for this topic,
   keyed by a unique combination of Reference Article, Citing Article,
   and Citation Marker Offset.

   3: Reference Article: Name of the reference paper 
            (file_name i.e, the ACL anthology-id) in Documents_Text

   4: Citing Article: Name of the citing paper 
            (file_name i.e, the ACL anthology-id) in Documents_Text

   5: Citation Marker Offset: pair of start and end offsets defining
   the text in the Citing Article for the Citation Marker of the
   citance.

   6: Citation Marker: Span of text defined by the Citation Marker
   Offset above.

   7: Citation Offset: Pair of start and end offsets defining the text
   in the Citing Article that contains the citation and conveys the
   authors' discussion of the citation.

   8: Citation Text: Span of text defined by the Citation Offset
   above.  Although the exact Citation Text span may vary between
   annotators, all Citation Text spans for the same Topic ID and
   Citance Number must have some overlap (minimally containing the
   same Citation Marker).

   9: Reference Offset: One to three pairs of offsets defining the
   portions of the Reference Article that the authors of the Citing
   Article are discussing in the citation.

  10: Reference Text: Span of text defined by the Reference Offset
  above. Discontiguous spans defined by multiple pairs of offsets are
  separated by ellipses "..."

  11: Discourse Facet: one of {Aim_Citation, Method_Citation,
  Results_Citation and Implication_Citation}
  
  12:  Annotator:  An alphabetic ID for the annotator

  All offsets are UTF-8 character offsets into the source document,
  where the first character in the document has offset 0. An offset
  pair "start-end" provides the offset of the first character of the
  string and the offset of the character immediately after the last
  character of the string, respectively; thus, the length of the
  string is end - start.