Annotation Rules

About this file: Rules followed to resolve difficult cases in annotation. It can serve as a synopsis of 
the larger annotation guidelines.


Marking Citation Text:
1. If there are explicit co-references to cited work, in citing sentence or following sentence, only then include those in citation.
2. Only include additional sentences if the main subject of the citing sentence is referenced in it, and it follows the citing sentence
3. Sentences preceding the citing sentence may only be setting the context of the citation, and may not be included in the citation text.

Marking Discourse Facets
1. Discourse facet is about the type of information described in the reference span. 
2. A maximum of 3 reference spans can be marked for every citance. In case these spans describe different different discourse facets, the most prevalent discourse facet is annotated
3. The larger annotation guidelines specifically mention that don't fall into the pitfall of deciding discourse facet based on the section where the reference span is
4. Types of Discourse Facets:
a. Aim
b. Method
c. Result
d. Implication

Marking reference spans
1. To select a reference span, look for the "reason" it was cited 
2. Try not to reference sentences in the Abstract. From the larger annotation guidelines document: "Wherever possible, please do not limit the reference span(s) to text that appears in the Abstract of the reference paper."
3. Sometimes tabulaed values are marked in the reference span. But such marking are always preceeded by the table caption.
4. Sentences from the citation text can be treated as separate citances sharing a citation marker, in case reference spans are very unlike each other
5. Ignore co-references in reference span
6. If the citation text is a general overview, then marking sentences in abstract/introduction is appropriate. 
7. If no text matches: "In the case that you absolutely cannot find ANY text in the paper that is specific to the reference and you feel very strongly that the reference is to the paper as a whole, you may indicate this scenario by marking the title of the reference paper as the reference span." 





