Participatory Design for Linguistic Engineering: 
the Case of the GEPPETTO Development Environment 

Fabio Ciravegna, Alberto Lavelli, Daniela Petrelli, Fabio Pianesi 
Istituto :per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica 
Loc. Pant~ di Povo 
1-38050 Trento, Italy 
e-maih {ciravellavellilpetrelli[pianesi}Qirst.itc.it 

Abstract 

Current tools for Linguistic Engineering (LE) do not completely fit the requirements for scale development and deployment of real applications. What seems to lack in the available tools is a comprehensive study of user needs. This is a real limitation in a field where people with very different back- grounds (from computer scientists to lin- guists) are involved. To avoid such a short- coming we adopted the Participatory De- sign (PD) methodology, i.e. a User Cen- tered approach that favors the definition of tools suited to the real user needs. In this paper we show how such methodology was used in the design and implementation of a development environment for LE applica- tions. 
Introduction 
The growing number of applications exploiting NLP techniques is bringing about a shift from an arti-san attitude with respect to NLP towards the need for more sophisticated solutions and tools (Linguis- tic Engineering, LE). Consequently, interest has in- creased in the study and implementation of environ- ments capable of supporting the users in the devel- opment, testing and debugging of Linguistic Engi- neering Applications (LEAs). In this respect, a ma- jor feature of a Linguistic Engineering Application Development System (LEADS) is to provide facil- ities for the development, reuse and integration of linguistic processors and data. 
Despite the remarkable results that have been achieved (too many to be listed here), the general impression is that these systems do not completely fit the requirements for scale development and de- ployment of real applications. In this connection, one major point is the concern about human fac- tors. In general, studies have conclusively shown that even small differences in the characteristics of the end users (e.g., computer experience, knowledge about the domain, use of the system) can heavily 
affect the suitability of the tools developed (Nielsen, 1993). The development of a LEA is a task involving different kinds of skills and expertise. For instance, it is conceivable that the development and mainte- nance of the needed linguistic resources (grammars and lexica) require different skills (and be therefore pursed by different people) than those involved in the construction and validation of the architecture of the final application. The involvement of users since the very beginning of the system design (i.e. the adoption of a User Centered approach) can greatly enhance the effectiveness of a LEADS: user needs can pervade the design and implementation of all the basic functionalities of the tool. Such an in-volvement has an impact on the design of the sys- tem: each typology of user should have available all the relevant tools for their work. Moreover, it is im- portant that the system is friendly, and easy to get accustomed with. Since situations can be envisaged in which the user is not a full-time LEA developer, the system must also be perspicuous and intuitive enough to support her/him on a time-to-time basis. These results depend on the availability of a careful analysis of the development cycle of LEAs; only such an analysis permits to single out basic (even if ab- stract) typologies of users defined in terms of their 
skills, the tasks they accomplish, and the like. 
Important support to these considerations comes from the field of human-computer interaction (Carmel et al., 1993). As a matter of fact, it is generally acknowledged that approximately 60-to- 80% of all problems of information systems can be traced to poor or inadequate requirement specifica- tions, including both lack of facilities and usability problems. What is needed is to involve day-to-day work experience early in the project, when the ba- sic design choices are made. Positive effects of User Centered approaches for the design of information systems are not limited to usability: benefits were discovered (Nielsen, 1993; Carmel et al., 1993) to be connected to time and cost saving during develop- ment, completeness of system functionalities, repair effort savings as well as to user satisfaction. 
The purpose of this paper is to describe a LEADS, 
called GEPPETTO, which has been developed with the aim of addressing these issues by adopting a User Centered design approach (Norman and Draper, 1986). Such a move resulted in an environment that: 
(A) supports the whole process of designing and de- veloping LEAs; (B) provides the different typologies of users with dedicated facilities which are suited to their skills and backgrounds; (C) improves on the training phase. 
Methodology 

A User Centered (UC) approach was adopted for the design of GEPPETTO. Indeed, UC approach takes user needs into account from the very beginning of the design phase till the final evaluation of the sys- tem. This way, system design is changed from a mere technical and individual activity into an inter- disciplinary and group activity. Importantly, UC ap- proach secures the attainment of such goals as: ap-propriateness with respect to user needs and desider- ata; flexibility with respect to different skills and dif- ferent user typologies; and overall usability. 
The engagement of users in the system design can occur at different levels: consultative level when users are considered as sources of information or as participants to final evaluations; representative level when they participate in structured design meetings; consensus level when users are part of the design team. 
For GEPPETTO we chose the Participatory Design methodology (henceforth PD, (of the ACM, 1993)) which falls in the third class. In PD, users act as fully empowered participants to the design pro- cess, sharing decisions together with system design- ers. Such a working style promotes mutual learn- ing between users and designers, and facilitates the identification of user needs and of possible misun- derstandings. Hence PD is particularly suitable for complex domains where it might be difficult for de- signers alone to get a knowledge sufficient for propos- ing meaningful solutions. This is certainly true of LE, because of the complexity of the domain and of the different skills involved in the development of a LEA. Moreover, certain peculiar techniques of PD, such as participatory prototyping, offer a nat- ural way to reduce errors otherwise not detectable until the final system is put to use. 
PD employs a wide range of techniques (Muller et al., 1993) whose applicability depends on such fac- tors as design goals, group size, availability of users for long periods, and the like. 
Concerning GEPPETTO design, PD was imple-mented by establishing a working group (WG) of five people consisting of system developers (2), users (2), and an interface design expert (1). Different tech- niques were applied at different stages of the design process: 
• 	Envisioning future solutions: in the early phases, informal discussions for clarifying global statements and stimulating the users' creative thinking took place. Outcomes of these meet-ings concerned the awareness of the different roles, skills and knowledge involved in the de- velopment of LEAs, and the identification of a number of basic user typologies. Moreover, it seemed unlikely to the WG that a single per- son could cover the whole process alone. That is, the development of a LEA is a multidisci-plinary work which can benefit from some kind of support in its cooperative evolution. 
• 	
Participatory requirement specifications: the discussion focussed on users desiderata and system capabilities and resulted in a list of the required functionalities. Such a list was then divided into subsets, each one corresponding to one of the user typologies. The discussion then centered on how each typology acts in isolation, and how it interacts with the others, during the development of a LEA. Thus, different levels for single and cooperative work were identified. 1 

• 	
Collaborative low-fi prototyping: dur-ing collaborative prototyping workshops, paper mock-ups (also called low-fi prototypes) were designed and evaluated by the WG. This activ- ity was extremely useful to move from ideas to concrete interface design, to detect and correct misunderstandings, and to elicit original solu- tions to unforeseen problems. The outcome was the complete definition of the system. 

• 	
Cooperative evaluations: cooperative evalu- ations of the first implementation supported the final refinements of the implemented environ- ment. At this stage, feedbacks from the users were discussed and taken into account for fur- ther improvements. 

• 	
Experimental sessions: even if not required by PD, empirical evaluations with users not in- volved in PD have been conducted to verify the effectiveness of the design. Method and results are discussed in Section 7. 


In the next section we will focus on the results of 
the first two steps of the PD methodology, as applied 
to GEPPETTO design. 
3 Users, Tasks and LE Systems 
The discussion inside working group was organized around three main (sequential) topics: 
• 	
the construction process of LEAs: development cycle, involved skills and tasks, etc.; 

• 	
user desiderata: rapid prototyping, graphical interfaces, openness of the architecture, deliv-


1The present version of GEPPETTO does not provide features for advanced cooperative work. 

_Applicative Raw
Cons~a/n~ Corpora 
of Rc m~ntatiw 
Test
Corpus 
[ Defimti°n °f l
ArcMtectulal
Requtrements 
Amhiteetural 
Requt:emenCa 

] DefiMtiot~ Mign [ LinguiJtic
I
& Specification of 
I Proce~ors Data
Develolnnent 
1 1 

Ptoc~ots Lingtustie
Resources 
Rdiner~ent 
t 


Figure 1: Development cycle of LE applications 
ery systems, modular approach to linguistic de- velopment, etc.; 
• 	specifications of system facilities: tools for browsing and editing linguistic data, API for integrating external resources, etc. 
3.1 Building LE Applications 
The working group focused on the abstract defini-tion of the development cycle of LEAs and of the typologies of the involved users. As a matter of fact this is a requirement of an LE approach to NLP sys- tems. 
The development cycle of LEAs was defined as in figure 1. 
As a first step, applicative constraints must be con- sidered. In fact, the working context of a LEA de- termines not only the global behavior of the LEA, but also the way the different modules interact to produce the desired behavior. Another preliminary step is the collection of raw corpora. 
After such a preparatory work, the following de- velopment cycle typically takes place: 
• 	identification of representative corpora. In this step the aforementioned raw corpora are classi- fied and filtered to find a set of examples that is representative of the characteristics of the whole corpus. The resulting corpus is then split in two parts: one to be used during the system devel- opment (training corpus), the other during the testing phase (test corpus); 
• definition of the architectural requirements. 
Given the applicative constraints and the char- acteristics of the corpus, the specific require- ments of the LEA are defined; 
• 	definition, design and implementation of the processors, according to the requirements of the previous point; 
• 	
development of the linguistic resources, accord-ing to the requirements arising from the previ- ous analysis; 

• 	
testing and refinement of both the processors and the data collection. 


Once all these steps have been gone through, the resulting architecture is delivered (delivery system) and customization can start. 
The working group singled out three different user typologies which can play a role in the tasks above. Each of them corresponds to different backgrounds, knowledge and skills: 2 
• 	
Linguistic Engineer (LER): expert on architec- tures for LE. Background: computer science; knowledge of computational linguistics; 

• 	
Computational Linguist (CL): expert on lin-guistic data development. Background: com-putational linguistics; little knowledge of com- puter science; 

• 	
Processor Manager (PM): expert on processors for language processing. Background: com-puter science; knowledge of computational lin- guistics. 


Accordingly, the development cycle has been re-fined as follows: 
• 	
identification of representative corpora: LER interacts with CL to provide a representative corpus for the application; 

• 	
definition of architectural requirements: given the corpus and the requirements for processors and linguistic data, LER interacts with PM and CL to define the correct architecture; 

• 	
definition, design and implementation of the processors: PM chooses (or designs and imple- ments) them; 

• 	
development of linguistic resources: CL chooses (or designs and implements) them; 


2Actually the working group added also an Applica- tion Manager, i.e. an expert of the domains and of the users of the LEA. Such a profile is not discussed in this paper. 
• 	test and refinement: LER checks the correspon- dence between the current implementation and the architectural requirements; the processors are tested by PM and the data collection by 
CL. 

In the end, the working group had effectively spec- ified the actions, the tasks, and the skills required to create LEAs. The following step was the identifica- tion of the user needs. 
3.2 User Needs and Desiderata 
The working group discussed some of the desirable features of a LEADS, from the point of view of the users. Results can be summarized as follows: 
• 	
facilities for the rapid prototyping of LEAs via graphical interfaces; 

• 	
facilities for choosing among resources (e.g. lex- ica and grammars) provided by libraries of lin- guistic data; 

• 	
specialized graphical browsers and editors for linguistic data; 

• 	
facilities for interactively testing and debugging processors and data; 

• 	
facilities for testing and debugging the whole architecture against test suites; 

• 	
aids for providing the delivery system; 


• 	
facilities for integrating processors and data dif- ferent from those already provided by the envi- ronment; 

• 	
facilities for integrating knowledge stored in ex- ternal modules (e.g. Knowledge Bases). 


One of the main outcomes of PD discussions was that the different users would benefit from a sin-gle, common tool capable of facilitating and support- ing their mutual interactions (even when performing their tasks independently) as well as the integration of resources developed independently. 3 
On the other hand, given the different profiles and skills involved, each of the three user typolo-gies needs different facilities and might prefer differ- ent interaction modalities. For example CLs tend to favor graphical interfaces that hide as much as pos- sible low-level details (e.g. internal data representa- tion). On the other hand, PMs have to cope with low level details. As it turns out, the ideal environ- ment should both address the differing interaction styles of each user, and, at the same time, provide a 
3In this paper we focus on the interactions among users belonging to the different typologies and on the integration of their work. We will not address the im- portant question of how to support the interactions and integration involving users of the same typology. For instance, we will not discuss here the issue of how the development of large grammars by different CLs can be properly supported by a LEADS. 
uniform environment where their contributions can be easily integrated. These results can be obtained if, at any time, the user can select all and only the functionalities he/she actually needs. 
A similar tension involves also linguistic data and processors. LERs want to see them as units that can be assembled to build the final architecture. PMs are inclined to consider the linguistic data as a unit, but see the processors as complex modules to manipu- late. Finally, CLs obviously must be able to single out pieces of linguistic data and organize them in a significant way, while using the processors as black boxes. 
Before discussing how user needs have been im-plemented in GEPPETTO, we briefly introduce the formalism for linguistic data as it was developed by the CLs of the working group. 



4 The Formalism for Linguistic Data 
CLs participating in the working group suggested a Typed Feature Logic oriented (Carpenter, 1992) formalism. The reasons were as follows: 
• 	
TFL formalisms provide a way for breaking down the structure of linguistic data, allowing for a clear separation between the description of abstract linguistic types and that of grammat- ical rules and lexical entries. 4 This facilitates knowledge encapsulation as well as a modular architecture of linguistic data. Such a modular- ity can play an important role in the reuse of existing data; 

• 	
typing secures to a high degree the consistency of the linguistic data. This speeds up the pro- cess of data editing and debugging; 

• 	
the formalism is well known and many basic uni- fication algorithms are available; 

• 	
it meets the demands of many current linguistic theories, e.g. LFG, GPSG, HPSG, etc. 


TFL specifications are compiled into a graph for- mat, where each node represents a Typed Feature Structure (TFS). Types and the type hierarchy have been implemented by adapting the encoding schema proposed by (Ait-Kaci et al., 1989) to the TFL for- mat. This permits to efficiently handle very large type hierarchies as well as to account in a straight- forward way for type disjunction. The standard TFL formalism has been modified to accommodate: 
• 	Declaration statements specifying, for instance, that a certain object is not an ordinary TFS. In case its properties must be assessed by other, 
4In this respect, CLs strongly suggested that some phrase-structure-like skeleton should be provided. This seems to better address their expectations and ways of thinking than a system in which grammar rules are ab- sent, as it is normally possible in type-oriented linguistic formalism (e.g. HPSG). 

possibly external, modules; such a fact can be the rapid prototyping of architectures by assembling specified by means of external constraints; already existing processors and linguistic systems, 
• 	
External constraints providing ,explicit links to external modules, e.g. morphological proces- sors, independent KBs, etc.; 

• 	
Directives for the unifier. For instance, it is possible to force the unifier to consider in the first place the paths that have been observed to cause more frequent failures (Uszkoreit, 1991). 


• 	Macros. 
Declaration statements and external constraints greatly enhance the modularity and portability of the LEAs developed by means of GEPPETTO, by al- lowing the reuse of existing processors and/or data. 
5 The GEPPETTO Environment 
In this section some of the characteristics of GEP- PETTO are outlined, focusing on those aspects that specifically meet user needs. A more detailed de- scription of GEPPETTO is contained in (Ciravegna et al., 1996). 
In GEPPETTO an application consists of two main parts: a (set of) processor(s) and a Linguistic Sys- tem. The latter is the collection of all the sets of linguistic descriptions relevant for the characteriza- tion of a given corpus. Given the kind of formal- ism adopted, namely TFL, a Linguistic System con- sists of: a type hierarchy, a grammar, a lexicon, and a set of macros. The concept of linguistic system is not simply conceived as a set of the four com-ponents just mentioned but it is a complex object with a central role in GEPPETTO: much of the de- velopment of LEAs is centered around linguistic sys- tems. CLs edit, browse, and update linguistic sys- tems. They can reuse existing linguistic systems, or parts thereof, to produce new ones. 
GEPPETTO maintains a conceptual distinction be- tween browsing/editing and testing/debugging. Ac-tually, browsing/editing can be performed indepen- dently by different users, whereas testing/debugging can require a strict cooperation between different ty- pology of users. This is so whenever an error is due to unexpected interactions between data and proces- sors. These observations emphasize the advantage of a single environment for the whole development cy- cle: different users have dedicated facilities for devel- opment, but a common environment for integrating and testing. 
We now turn to a discussion of the facilities and tools provided to the different users. 
5.1 Supporting the Linguistic Engineer LER main task is the study of architectural require- ments (together with PM). He/she also controls the 
compliance of the LEA with the initial requirements. To this end, GEPPETTO provides support for: (a) and (b) tests against a test corpus. Both data and processors are seen by the LER as black boxes that can be combined by means of a graphical interface. 
When the architecture meets the requirements, a delivery system can be produced. It contains the selected linguistic system and processor(s), and ex- cludes the GEPPETTO development environment. 
5.2 Supporting the Processor Manager 
PM task is to identify the processors that can satisfy the architectural requirements. She/he can choose among the processors made available by GEPPETTO 5 or link external ones to the environment. In the lat- ter case, an API is provided to connect the exter- nal processor to the GEPPETTO world. Once a new processor has been properly linked, it is completely identical to the other default processors: it can be selected via the graphical interface, it can take ad- vantage of the debugging/testing facilities, and so 
on. 
Via API, it is also possible to interface LEAs with other kinds of external modules, e.g. modules which make available functionalities not provided by the environment (e.g. Knowledge Bases or morphologi- cal analyzers). 
PM can also choose among different unification algorithms that have been designed to: 
* 	carefully control and minimize the amount of copying needed with non-deterministic parsing schemata (Wroblewski, 1987) (Kogure, 1990); 
• 	provide a better match between the character- istics of the unifiers and those of the linguis-tic processors. Indeed, different linguistic pro- cessors may profit of different unification algo- rithms. The availability of different unification algorithms allows the user to choose the one which best fits the needs of the particular lin- guistic processor at hand. 

5.3 Supporting the Computational Linguist 
A considerable amount of effort has been devoted to create suitable (specialized) graphical tools for 
CL. Recall that CL main task is to build a linguistic system satisfying the application requirements. The graphical environment must allow CL to ignore low- level details as much as possible, and concentrate on the linguistic aspects of data description. 
CLs can build a linguistic system both by pasting already existing components (and modifying them 
5At present, GEPPETTO features two chart-based parsers (a bidirectional Head-Driven Bottom-Up (Satta and Stock, 1989) and a CYK-like) and a Head-Driven Bottom-Up non-deterministic generator (Pianesi, 1993). We plan to make available a wider array of processors in the near future. 
Figure 2: GEPPETTOduring a debugging session. 
when necessary) and by building it from scratch. 6 
As the data forming the parts of a linguistic sys- tem differ in attributes, global organization and functions, specialized graphical tools have been de- signed for browsing/editing the type hierarchy, the grammar, the lexicon and the macros. 
The main tools for the CL are: 

• 	
a grapher for browsing and editing the type in- heritance hierarchy. It displays mouse sensible nodes and allows to add/delete/modify nodes, as well as to modify the hierarchy itself; 

• 	
browsers for data sets such as lexicon, grammar and macros. They allow to add/delete/modify/copy elements in the data sets, as well as to undertake actions on the data set as a whole (e.g. compiling it); 

• 	
editors for editing and modifying properties of single lexical entries, grammar rules, macros and type hierarchy nodes. They include edi- tors for TFL descriptions, feature appropriate- ness statements, etc. TFL-syntax error check-ing, TFL description compilation and TFS vi- sualization are supported. Documentation and 


SCurrently GEPPETTO provides some standard re-sources for Italian: a type hierarchy, two lexica and two grammars. 
comment notes can be attached to each item; 
* 	interactive and post processing debugging tools (at now mainly a sophisticated chart browser). 
Facilities are also supplied for computing statistics about performances on test suites. In particular, it is possible to detect points where unification failures arise. Such results can be exploited either to hand- tune the linguistic systems to the corpus needs, or by feeding them into a module which forces unification algorithms to consider unification failure hypothesis first, this way speeding up the whole processing. 


6 PD at Work: the Debugging Tools 
The PD working group suggested to divide the tools for testing and debugging into interactive facilities (such as tracers and steppers to follow the applica- tion of grammar rules during processing), and "post- processing" facilities. In the working group it was agreed that naive interactive tools can be quite diffi- cult to be fully exploited given the great number of rule applications and unifications that happen during parsing. In order to reduce the number of rule applications and unifications traced, it is neces- sary to have a very powerful (and complex) language which makes the user able to program the tracer; but usually tracer's expressive power is quite difficult to be fully taken advantage of. Moreover, it is impor- tant that the tools are (relatively) easy to use, so that they can be usefully exploit also by users not necessarily expert of that particular tool or by time- to-time users. Given these considerations and also the fact that all the processors currently available are chart-based (and hence all the results produced during processing are still available at the end of the processing itself), the discussion focused on the post-processing tools. 

Within such tools, the chart browser plays a cen- tral role. To better discuss its characteristics, paper mockups were jointly created and ,evaluated. Such an effort produced a highly detailed description of the tool functionalities and of its layout; in partic- ular, the kind of information and actions (showing parse/generation trees, TFS descriptions associated with edges) to be made available to the user, the different viewpoints on edges and vertices, etc. 
As it turned out, the chart browser window is the starting point for the exploration of the structures produced during processing. The tool (cf. figure 2) allows the user 
• 	
to see the edges either in a strictly sequential way or as organized around the objects con-necting them (i.e. vertices for the parser and constraints for the generator); 

• 	
to filter edges according to their type (ac-tive/inactive edges), to their categories, etc.; 

• 	
to browse through the wide and complex data structures produced; 


* 	to activate auxiliary tools. 
The chart browser is a fairly standard debugging tool; in GEPPETTO the adoption of a User Cen-tered approach permitted to design a flexible and extendible tool, which is the central structure for browsing through the elements built during process- ing. 
Besides the chart browser facilities described above (and already implemented), the working group faced the problem of how to single out the failures happened during parsing and to understand their causes. Browsing edges in the chart it is pos- sible to identify (guess) possible error points and to concentrate the focus on them: it was envisaged the possibility of selecting some edges in the chart and run the parser on them in a special mode. During this special running mode G~.PPETTO reports diag- nostic messages on the causes of the failure: missing grammar rules/lexical items, failure during unifica- tion, etc. If the failure is due to unification, the involved paths are reported. 
Evaluations with Users 
The implemented system was assessed by means of a formative evaluation (Nielsen, 1993), to test its general usability and the quality of the proposed so- lutions. 
Participants The testing group consisted of eight people from our department. Participants had dif- ferent degrees of expertise in NLP, though none of them had ever used GEPPETTO before, nor had par- ticipated in the PD process. Participants were not required to have any previous knowledge of the TFS formalism. 
Procedure Users were given the manual in ad- vance but they were not required to read it before the test, nor any training occurred before the testing phase. During the experiment, users were allowed to freely consult the manual. Each participant was asked to perform 4 tasks: 
1. 
architecture 	definition and composition: the participant was required to create her/his per- sonal LEA by composing existing linguistic re- sources and processors to form a new architec- ture; 

2. 
lexicon update: 	the participant had to insert lexical entries in the lexicon, and to run the parser over a sentence containing the new terms; 

3. 
hierarchy manipulation and 	grammar update: the participant was asked to modify the type hierarchy by acting on its graph. Furthermore, she/he had to modify the grammar. Finally, by browsing the resulting parse tree, the sub- ject was asked to verify the correctness of the changes; 

4. 	
test suite run: lastly users had to load an exist- ing test suite (a file), to add the sentence of task 2 and to run their architecture over it; results of the running had to be saved in a log file. 


During the experiment, participants were re-quested to verbalize their thoughts. This method, known as thinking-aloud, permits an easy detection of the problematic parts of the human-computer in- teraction as well as to understand how users perceive the system (Nielsen, 1993). An experimenter sat near the participant, taking notes on occurring prob- lems and stimulating the subject to express her/his thoughts. After the test phase, the experimenter in- terviewed each participant, discussing the problems she/he run into, gathering suggestions on possible improvements, and investigating user satisfaction. All performances were videotaped to allow succes- sive analysis. 
Results The choices done and implemented into GEPPETTO supported naive users in moving around and acting in a complex and unfamiliar environment. Even participants who had not read the manual and had only a little experience in NLP were able to complete the tasks in less then one hour. 7 Through 
7This time is definitely low considering that users were required to comment their actions, were allowed 
observations and interviews it could be verified that participants reached a good understanding of the system and judged it positively. 
Some weaknesses in the interface design were iden- tified: problems mainly limited to common graphi- cal user interfaces mistakes, e.g. lack of feedback in resource status, and to the understanding of the terminology developed during PD (naming problem) emerged. Identified problems may be solved with a limited revision of the graphical interface. 
Experiments demonstrated that the adoption of PD can bring intuitiveness also in the design of a complex LEADS: even users without any experience with GEPPETTO and limited knowledge in NLP were able to easily understand the system organization and to effectively use its tools to accomplish non trivial tasks. 
8 Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper we have discussed the importance of user involvement in the design of a LEADS and ex- emplified it by discussing our experience with GEP- PETTO. 
The PD methodology enabled users to express their desires and needs while participating to the de- sign phase. This permitted to create an environment whose facilities are suited for each of the users/tasks involved in the development of a LEA. The design work started from very general issues (e.g. the defi- nition of the development cycle) and went into very specific details (e.g. the functionalities associated with the buttons of each window). 
It must be stressed that a crucial role was played by the interface design expert, who organized the many different ideas in a concrete and coherent in- terface layout, provided the necessary insights to analyze user-machine interactions, and continuously stimulated the active cooperation within the work- ing group. 
GEPPETTO has been implemented under Allegro Common Lisp and runs on SUN SPARCstations. The graphical facilities have been implemented by means of CLIM and Grasper. 
GEPPETTO has been used in the development of a number of applicative projects, in different ap- plication domains, including multi-lingual text gen- eration (LRE-GIST), information extraction from agency news (LE-FACILE), and Natural Language information query (LE-TAMIC-P); all these projects have been funded by the European Union. 
Future work on GEPPETTO will address a num- ber of important pending issues. Among them it is worth mentioning: the full implementation of the debugging tools suggested by the user group and the implementation of a number of facilities to improve 
to consult the manual and were stimulated in exploring GEPPETTO. 
GEPPETTO's capability of supporting the design of LEA architectures. 
References 
Hassan Ait-Kaci, Robert Boyer, Patrick Lincoln, and Roger Nasr. 1989. Efficient implementation of lattice operations. A CM Transactions on Pro- gramming Languages and Systems, 11(1):115-146. 
Erran Carmel, Randall Whitaker, and Joey George. 1993. PD and Joint Application Design: A transatlantic comparison. Communication of the ACM, 36(4):40-48, June. 
B. Carpenter. 	1992. The Logic of Typed Feature Structures. Cambridge University Press, Cam-bridge, Massachusetts. 
Fabio Ciravegna, Alberto Lavelli, Daniela Petrelli, and Fabio Pianesi. 1996. The Geppetto Develop- ment Environment. Version 2.0.b. User Manual. Technical Report 9608-10, IRST, August. 
Kiyoshi Kogure. 1990. Strategic lazy incremen- tal copy graph unification. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Lin- guistics, pages 223-228, Helsinki, Finland. 
Michael Muller, Daniel Wildman, and Ellen White. 1993. Taxonomy of PD practices: A brief prac- titioner's guide. Communications of the ACM, 36(4):26-28, June. 
Jakob Nielsen. 	1993. Usability Engineering. Aca-demic Press. Donald A. Norman and Stephen W. Draper. 1986. 
User Centered System Design: new Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction. Lawrance Erl- baum Associates. 
Communications of the ACM. 1993. Special Issue on Participatory Design, June. 
Fabio Pianesi. 1993. Head-driven bottom-up gener- ation and Government and Binding: a unified per- spective. In Helmut Horacek and Michael Zock, editors, New Concepts in Natural Language Gen-eration: Planning, Realization and Systems, pages 187 - 214. Pinter Publishers, London. 
Giorgio Satta and Oliviero Stock. 1989. Formal properties and implementation of bidirectional charts. In proceedings of the Eleventh Interna- tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Detroit, MI. Hans Uszkoreit. 1991. Strategies for adding control information to declarative grammars. In Proceed-ings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 237-245, Berke- ley, California, USA. David A. Wroblewski. 1987. Nondestructive graph unification. In Proceedings of AAAI-87, pages 582-587, Seattle, WA. 




