Clustering Hungarian Verbs on the Basis of Complementation Patterns





Kata Ga´ bor
Dept. of Language Technology
Linguistics Institute, HAS
1399 Budapest, P. O. Box 701/518
Hungary
gkata@nytud.hu


Eniko˝ He´ja
Dept. of Language Technology
Linguistics Institute, HAS
1399 Budapest, P. O. Box 701/518
Hungary
eheja@nytud.hu









Abstract

Our paper reports an attempt to apply an un- 
supervised clustering algorithm  to a  Hun- 
garian  treebank in order to obtain seman- 
tic verb classes.   Starting  from the hypo- 
thesis that semantic metapredicates underlie 
verbs’ syntactic realization,  we investigate 
how one can obtain semantically motivated 
verb classes by automatic means.  The 150 
most frequent  Hungarian  verbs were clus- 
tered on the basis of their complementation 
patterns, yielding  a set of basic classes and 
hints about the features that determine ver- 
bal subcategorization. The resulting classes 
serve as a basis for the subsequent analysis 
of their alternation behavior.

1   Introduction

For over a decade, automatic  construction  of wide- 
coverage structured lexicons  has been in the center 
of interest in the natural language processing com- 
munity. On the one hand, structured  lexical data- 
bases are easier  to handle and to expand  because 
they allow making generalizations over classes of 
words. On the other hand, interest in the automatic 
acquisition of lexical information from corpora is 
due to the fact that manual construction of such re- 
sources is time-consuming,  and the resulting data- 
base  is difficult to update. Most of the work in 
the field of acquisition of verbal lexical properties 
aims at learning subcategorization frames from cor- 
pora e.g.   (Pereira et al., 1993; Briscoe and Car- 
roll, 1997;  Sass, 2006). However, semantic group-


ing of verbs on the basis of their syntactic distribu- 
tion or other quantifiable  features has also gained at- 
tention (Schulte im Walde, 2000; Schulte im Walde 
and Brew, 2002; Merlo and Stevenson, 2001; Dorr 
and Jones, 1996). The goal of these investigations  is 
either the validation of verb classes based on (Levin,
1993), or finding algorithms for the categorization of 
new verbs.
  Unlike  these projects,  we report an attempt to 
cluster verbs on the basis of their syntactic proper- 
ties with the further goal of identifying  the seman- 
tic classes relevant for the description of Hungarian 
verbs’ alternation behavior. The theoretical ground- 
ing of our clustering  attempts is provided by the 
so-called Semantic Base Hypothesis   (Levin, 1993; 
Koenig et al., 2003). It is founded on the observation 
that semantically similar verbs tend to occur in simi- 
lar syntactic contexts, leading to the assumption that 
verbal semantics determines argument structure and 
the surface realization of arguments. While in Eng- 
lish semantic argument roles are mapped to confi- 
gurational positions in the tree structure, Hungarian 
codes complement structure in its highly rich nom- 
inal inflection system. Therefore, we start from the 
examination of case-marked NPs in the context of 
verbs.
  The experiment discussed in this paper is the first 
stage of an ongoing project for finding the semantic 
verb classes which  are syntactically relevant in Hun- 
garian. As we do not have presuppositions about 
which classes have to be used, we chose an unsu- 
pervised clustering  method described in  (Schulte 
im Walde, 2000). The 150 most frequent Hunga- 
rian verbs were categorized according to their comp-




91
Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Student Research Workshop, pages 91–96, 
Prague, June 2007. Qc 2007 Association for Computational Linguistics


lementation  structures in a syntactically  annotated 
corpus, the Szeged Treebank (Csendes et al., 2005). 
We are seeking the answer to two questions:

1. Are the resulting clusters semantically coherent 
(thus reinforcing  the Semantic Base Hypothe- 
sis)?

2. If so, what are the alternations responsible for 
their similar behavior?

  The subsequent sections present the input features 
[2] and the clustering methods [3], followed by the 
presentation of our results [4].  Problematic  issues 
raised by the evaluation are discussed in [5]. Future 
work is outlined in [6]. The paper ends with the con- 
clusions [7].

2   Feature Space

As currently available Hungarian parsers (Babarczy 
et al., 2005; Ga´bor and He´ja, 2005) cannot be used 
satisfactorily for extracting verbal argument struc- 
tures from corpora, the first experiment was carried 
out using a manually  annotated Hungarian corpus, 
the Szeged Treebank. Texts of the corpus come from 
different topic areas such  as business  news,  daily 
news, fiction, law, and compositions of students. It 
currently comprises 1.2 million words with POS tag- 
ging and syntactic annotation which extends to top- 
level sentence constituents but does not differentiate 
between complements and adjuncts.
  When applying a classification or clustering algo- 
rithm to a corpus, a crucial  question is which quan- 
tifiable features reflect the most precisely the lin- 
guistic properties underlying word classes. (Brent,
1993)  uses regular  patterns.  (Schulte im Walde,
2000; Schulte im Walde and Brew, 2002; Briscoe 
and Carroll, 1997) use  subcategorization   frame 
frequencies obtained  from parsed corpora,  poten- 
tially completed by semantic selection information. 
(Merlo  and Stevenson, 2001) approximates diathesis 
alternations by hand-selected grammatical features. 
While this method has the advantage of working on 
POS-tagged, unparsed corpora, it is costly with res- 
pect to time and linguistic expertise.  To overcome 
this drawback, (Joanis and Stevenson, 2003)  de- 
velop a general  feature  space for supervised verb 
classification. (Stevenson and Joanis, 2003) inves- 
tigate the applicability  of this general feature space


to unsupervised verb clustering tasks. As unsuper- 
vised methods are more sensitive to noisy features, 
the key  issue is to filter out the large number of 
probably irrelevant  features.  They propose a semi- 
supervised feature selection method which outper- 
forms both hand-selection of features and usage of 
the full feature set.
  As in our experiment  we do not have a pre-defined 
set  of semantic  classes,  we need  to apply unsu- 
pervised methods. Neither  have we manually de- 
fined grammatical  cues, not knowing which alter- 
nations should be approximated.   Hence, similarly 
to (Schulte im Walde, 2000), we represent verbs by 
their subcategorization frames.
  In accordance with the annotation of the treebank, 
we included both complements and adjuncts in sub- 
categorization patterns. It is important to note, how- 
ever, that not only practical  considerations lead us 
to this decision. First, there are no reliable syntactic 
tests for differentiating  complements from adjuncts. 
This is due to the fact that Hungarian is a highly in- 
flective,  non-configurational  language, where con- 
stituent order does not reveal dependency relations. 
Indeed, complements and adjuncts of verbs tend to 
mingle. In parallel,  Hungarian  presents a very rich 
nominal inflection system: there are 19 case suf- 
fixes, and most of them can correspond to more than 
one syntactic function,  depending on the verb class 
they occur with.  Second, we believe that adjuncts 
can be at least as revealing  of verbal meaning  as 
complements are: many of them are not productive 
(in the sense that they cannot be added to any verb), 
they can only appear with predicates the meaning of 
which is compatible with the semantic role of the ad- 
junct. For these considerations we chose to include 
both complements and adjuncts in subcategorization 
patterns.
  Subcategorization  frames  to be extracted  from 
the treebank  are  composed  of case-marked  NPs 
and infinitives  that belong to a  children node of 
the verb’s maximal projection. As Hungarian is a 
non-configurational  language, this operation simply 
yields a non-ordered list of the verb’s syntactic de- 
pendents.  There was no upper bound on the num- 
ber of syntactic  dependents to be included in the 
frame. Frame types were obtained from individual 
frames by omitting lexical information  as well as 
every piece of morphosyntactic description except


for the POS tag and the case suffix. The generaliza- 
tion yielded 839 frame types altogether.1

3   Clustering Methods

In accordance with our goal to set up a basis  for 
a semantic classification,  we chose to perform the 
first clustering trial on the 150 most frequent verbs 
in the Szeged Treebank. The representation of verbs 
and the clustering  process were carried out based on 
(Schulte im Walde, 2000). The data to be compared 
were the maximum likelihood  estimates of the pro- 
bability distribution of verbs over the possible frame 
types:
f (v, t)


where fe is the estimated and fc is the observed fre- 
quency.
Two alternative  bottom-up clustering algorithms 
were then applied to the data:

1. First we employed an agglomerative clustering 
method, starting from 150 singleton clusters. 
At every iteration we merged the two most sim- 
ilar clusters and re-counted the distance mea- 
sures.	The problem with this approach,   as 
Schulte im Walde notes on her experiment, is 
that verbs tend to gather in a small number of 
big classes after a few iterations. To avoid this, 
we followed her in setting to four the maximum


p(t|v) =


(1)
f (v)


number of elements 
occuring in a cluster.  This
method - and the size of 
the corpus - allowed


with f (v)  being the frequency  of the verb, and
f (v, t) being the frequency of the verb in the frame. 
These values have been calculated  for each of the
150 verbs and 839 frame types.
  Probability  distributions were compared using re- 
lative entropy as a distance measure:


us to categorize 120 out of 150 verbs into 38 
clusters,  as going on with the process would 
have led us to considerably  less coherent clus- 
ters. However, the results confronted  us with the 
chaining  effect, i.e.  some of the clusters had a 
relatively big distance between their least


n	xi
D(xl/y) =	xi · log
i=1	i



(2)


similar members.

2. In the second experiment  we put 
a restriction on the distance 
between each pair of verbs be-


Due to the large number  of subcategorization
frame types, verbs’ representation comprise a lot of 
zero probability  figures. Using relative  entropy as 
a distance measure compels us to apply a smoothing 
technique to be able to deal with these figures. How- 
ever, we do not want to lose the information  coded 
in zero frequencies - namely, the presumable incom- 
patibility of the verb with certain semantic roles as- 
sociated with specific case suffixes.  Since we work 
with the 150 most frequent verbs, we wish to use 
a method  which is apt to reflect that a gap in the 
case of a high-frequency  lemma is more likely to be 
an impossible  event than in the case of a relatively 
less frequent lemma (where it might  as well be acci- 
dental). That is why we have chosen the smoothing 
technique below:


0, 001


longing  to the same cluster. That is, in order for 
a new verb to be added to a cluster, its distance 
from all of the current cluster members had to 
be smaller than the maximum  distance stated 
based on test runs. In this experiment we could 
categorize 71 verbs into 23 clusters. The con- 
venience of this method over the first one is its 
ability to produce popular yet coherent clusters, 
which is a particularly  valuable feature given 
that our goal at this stage is to establish basic 
verb classes for Hungarian.  However, we are 
also planning to run a top-down  clustering  al- 
gorithm on the data to get a probably more pre- 
cise overview of their structure.

4	Results

With both methods we describe in Section 3, a big


fe  =


if
f (v)



(3)


part of the verbs 
showed  a tendency  to 
gather to-
gether in a few but 
popular clusters, while 
the rest


fc(t, v) = 0

1 The order in which syntactic dependents appear in the sen-


of them were typically paired with their nearest 
synonym (e.g.: za´ r (close) with ve´gez (finish) or


tence was not taken into account.


antonym (e.g.:


u¨ l (sit) with a´ ll (stand)).  
Naturally,


method 1 (i.e. placing an upper limit on the num- 
ber of verbs within a cluster) produced more clus- 
ters and gave more valuable results on the least fre- 
quent verbs. On the other hand, method 2 (i.e. plac- 
ing an upper limit on the distance between each pair 
of verbs within the class) is more efficient for iden- 
tifying basic verb classes with a lot of members. 
Given our objective to provide a Levin-type  classi- 
fication for Hungarian, we need to examine whether 
the clusters are semantically  coherent,  and if  so, 
what kind of semantic properties are shared among 
class members. The three most popular verb clusters 
were investigated first, because they contain many 
of the most frequent verbs and yet are characterized 
by strong inter-cluster  coherence due to the method 
used. The three clusters absorbed one third of the 71 
categorized verbs. The clusters are the following:

C-1 VERBS OF BEING: marad (remain), van (be),
lesz (become), nincs (not being)

C-2 MODALS:  megpro´ ba´ l (try out), pro´ ba´ l (try), 
szokik (used  to), szeret  (like), akar (want), 
elkezd  (start), fog (will),  k´ıva´ n (wish), kell 
(must)

C-3 MOVEMENT VERBS: indul (leave), jo¨ n (come), 
elindul (depart),  megy (go), kimegy (go out), 
elmegy (go away)

  Verb clusters  C-1 and C-3 exhibit  intuitively 
strong semantic coherence, whereas C-2 is best de- 
fined along syntactic lines as ’modals’. A subclass 
of C-2 is composed of verbs which express some 
mental attitude towards undertaking an action, e.g. 
(szeret (like), akar (want), k´ıva´ n (wish)), but for the 
rest of the verbs it is hard to capture shared meaning 
components.
It  can be said in general  about the clusters  ob- 
tained that many of them can be anchored to ge- 
neral semantic metapredicates or one of the argu- 
ments’ semantic  role, e.g.:  CHANGE  OF  STATE 
VERBS (ero˝ so¨ dik (get stronger), gyengu¨ l (intransi- 
tive  weaken), emelkedik (intransitive  rise)), verbs 
with a  beneficiary   role (biztos´ıt (guarantee),  ad 
(give), nyu´ jt (provide), ke´sz´ıt(make)),  VERBS  OF 
ABILITY (sikeru¨ l (succeed), lehet (be possible), tud 
(be able, can)). Some clusters seem to result from a 
tighter semantic relation, e.g. VERBS OF APPEA-


RANCE  or VERBS  OF  JUDGEMENT  were put to- 
gether. In other cases the relation  is broader as verbs 
belonging to the class seem to share only aspectual 
characteristics, e.g. AGENTIVE  VERBS OF CONTI - 
NUOS ACTIVITIES (u¨ l (be sitting), a´ ll (be standing), 
lakik (live  somewhere), dolgozik  (work)).  At the 
other end of the scale we find one group of verbs 
which ’accidentally’  share the same syntactic  pat- 
terns without being semantically related (foglalkozik 
(deal with sg), tala´ lkozik (meet sy), rendelkezik (dis- 
pose of sg)).

5   Evaluation and Discussion

As  (Schulte im Walde, 2007) notes, there is no 
widely accepted  practice of  evaluating  semantic 
verb classes. She divides the methods into two major 
classes. The first type of methods assess whether the 
resulting clusters are coherent enough, i. e. elements 
belonging  to the same cluster are closer to each other 
than to elements outside the class, according to an 
independent similarity/distance  measure. However, 
relying on such a method  would not help us eva- 
luating the semantic coherence of our classes.  The 
second type of methods use gold standards. Widely 
accepted gold standards in this field are Levin’s verb 
classes or verbal WordNets.  As we do not dispose 
of a Hungarian  equivalent  of Levin’s classification
– that is exactly why we experiment with automatic 
clustering – we cannot use it directly.
  We also run across difficulties  when considering 
Hungarian verbal WordNet  (Kuti et al., 2005) as the 
standard for evaluation.  Mapping verb clusters to 
the net would require to state semantic relatedness 
in terms of WordNet-type hierarchy relations. How- 
ever, if we try to capture the distance between verbal 
meanings by the number of intermediary  nodes in 
the WordNet, we face the problem that the semantic 
distance between mother-children  nodes is not uni- 
form.
  As our work is about obtaining a Levin-type  verb 
classification, it could be an obvious choice to eva- 
luate semantic classes by collecting alternations spe- 
cific to the given class. Hungarian language hardly 
lends itself to this method  because of its peculiar 
syntactic features. The large number of subcatego- 
rization frames and the optionality  of most comple- 
ments and adjuncts yield too much possible alterna-




ac
c
in
s
a
b
l
e
l
a
m
ar
ad
-
co
m
ca
us
e
m
at
eri
al
v
a
n
-
co
m
ca
us
e
m
at
eri
al
l
e
s
z
-
co
m
ca
us
e
m
at
eri
al
ni
n
c
s
-
co
m
ca
us
e
m
at
eri
al







Table 1: The semantic roles of cases beside C-3 verb 
cluster


tions. Hence, we decided to narrow down the scope 
of investigation. We start from verb clusters and the 
meaning components their members share. Then we 
attempt to discover which semantic roles can be li- 
cenced by these meaning components.   If verbs in 
the same cluster agree both in being compatible with 
the same semantic roles and in the syntactic encod- 
ing of these roles, we consider that they form a cor- 
rect cluster.
  To put it somewhat more formally, we represent 
verb classes by matrices with a) nominal  case suf- 
fixes in columns and b) individual  verb lemmata in 
rows. The first step of the evaluation process is to fill 
in the cells with the semantic roles the given suffix 
can code in the context of the verb. We consider the 
clusters correct, if the corresponding matrices meet 
two requirements:

1. They have to be specific to the cluster.

2. Cells in the same column  have to contain the 
same semantic role.

  Tables 1. and 2. illustrate coherent and distinctive 
case matrices2.
  According to Table 1.  ablative  case, just as e- 
lative,  codes a physical  source in the environment 
of movement verbs. Both cases having  the same 
semantic role, the decision between them is deter- 
mined by the semantics of the corresponding NP. 
These cases code an other semantic role – cause – 
in the case of verbs of existence (Table 2).
  It is important to note that we do not dispose of a 
preliminary list of semantic roles. To avoid arbitrary

  2 Com is for comitative – approximately encoding the mean- 
ing ’together with’ , ins is for the instrument of the described 
event, source denotes a starting point in the space, cause refers 
to entity which evoked the eventuality described by the verb.


Table 2: The semantic roles of cases beside C-1 verb 
cluster


or vague role specifications, we need more than one 
persons to fill in the cells, based on example sen- 
tences.

6   Future Work

There  are two major directions regarding our fu- 
ture work.  With respect to the automatic cluster- 
ing process, we have the intention  of widening the 
scope of the grammatical  features to be compared 
by enriching subcategorization frames by other mor- 
phological  properties.  We are also planning to test 
top-down  clustering  methods such as the one de- 
scribed in (Pereira et al., 1993). On the long run, it 
will be inevitable to make experiments on larger cor- 
pora. The obvious choice is the 180 million words 
Hungarian National Corpus (Va´radi, 2002). It is a 
POS-tagged corpus but does not contain any syntac- 
tic annotation;  hence its use would require at least 
some partial  parsing such as NP analysis to be em- 
ployable for our purposes. The other future direc- 
tion concerns evaluation  and linguistic analysis of 
verb clusters. We define well-founded  verb classes 
on the basis of semantic role matrices. These se- 
mantic roles can be filled in a sentence  by case- 
marked NPs. Therefore, evaluation of automatically 
obtained clusters presupposes the definition of such 
matrices, which is our major linguistic task in the 
future. When we have the supposed matrices at our 
disposal, we can start evaluating the clusters via ex- 
ample sentences which illustrate case suffix alterna- 
tions or roles characteristic to specific classes.

7   Conclusions

The experiment of clustering the 150 most frequent 
Hungarian verbs is the first step towards finding the 
semantic verb classes underlying   verbs’ syntactic 
distribution. As we did not have presuppositions


about the relevant classes, neither any gold standard 
for automatic evaluation, the results have to serve 
as input for a detailed linguistic  analysis to find out 
at what extent they are usable for the syntactic des- 
cription of Hungarian. However,  as demonstrated 
in Section 4, the verb clusters we got show surpris- 
ingly transparent semantic coherence. These results, 
obtained from a corpus which is by several orders of 
magnitude smaller than what is usual for such pur- 
poses, is a reinforcement  of the usability of the Se- 
mantic Base Hypothesis for language analysis. Our 
further work will emphasize both the refinement of 
the clustering  methods and the linguistic interpre- 
tation of the resulting classes.


References

Anna Babarczy,  Ba´lint  Ga´bor,  Ga´bor  Hamp, Andra´s 
Ka´rpa´ti,  Andra´s Rung and Istva´n  Szakada´t.   2005. 
Hunpars: mondattani elemzo˝ alkalmaza´s [Hunpars: A 
rule-based sentence parser for Hungarian]. Proceed- 
ings of the 3th Hungarian  Conference of Computa- 
tional Linguistics  (MSZNY05), pages 20-28, Szeged, 
Hungary.

Michael R. Brent. 1993. From grammar to lexicon: un- 
supervised learning of lexical syntax. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(2):243–262,  MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, USA.

Ted Briscoe and John Carroll. 1997. Automatic Extrac- 
tion of Subcategorization from Corpora. Proceedings 
of the 5th Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing (ANLP-97),  pages 356–363,  Washington, 
DC, USA.

Do´ ra Csendes, Ja´nos Csirik,  Tibor  Gyimo´ thy and Andra´s 
Kocsor. 2005. The Szeged Treebank. LNCS series 
Vol. 3658, 123-131.

Bonnie  J. Dorr and Doug Jones.   1996. Role of Word 
Sense Disambiguation in Lexical Acquisition: Predict- 
ing Semantics from Syntactic Cues. Proceedings of 
the 14th International  Conference on Computational 
Linguistics  (COLING-96),   pages 322–327, Kopen- 
hagen, Denmark.

Kata Ga´bor and Eniko˝ He´ja.   2005. Vonzatok e´s sza-


ceedings of the 10th Conference of the EACL (EACL
2003), pages 163–170,  Budapest, Hungary.

Jean-Pierre Koenig, Gail Mauner and Breton Bienvenue.
2003. Arguments for Adjuncts. Cognition, 89, 67-
103.

Judit Kuti,  Pe´ter  Vajda and Ka´roly  Varasdi.	2005.
Javaslat  a magyar  igei WordNet kialak´ıta´sa´ra [Pro- 
posal for  Developing the Hungarian WordNet of 
Verbs]. Proceedings of the 3th Hungarian Conference 
of Computational  Linguistics  (MSZNY05), pages 79–
87, Szeged, Hungary.

Beth Levin.  1993. English Verb Classes And Alterna- 
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. Chicago Univer- 
sity Press.

Paola Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson.  2001. Automatic 
Verb Classification  Based on Statistical Distributions 
of Argument Structure. Computational Linguistics,
27(3), pages 373-408.

Fernando C. N. Pereira, Naftali Tishby and Lillan Lee.
1993.  Distributional Clustering of English Words.
31st Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 183-190, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Ba´lint Sass. 2006.  Igei vonzatkeretek az MNSZ tagmon- 
dataiban [Exploring Verb Frames in the Hungarian Na- 
tional Corpus].  Proceedings of the 4th Hungarian 
Conference of Computational Linguistics (MSZNY06), 
pages 15–22,  Szeged, Hungary.

Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2000. Clustering Verbs Se- 
mantically According to their Alternation Behaviour. 
Proceedings of the 18th International  Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING-00), pages 747–
753, Saarbru¨ cken, Germany.

Sabine Schulte im Walde and Chris Brew. 2002. Induc- 
ing German Semantic Verb Classes from Purely Syn- 
tactic Subcategorisation Information. Proceedings of 
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational  Linguistics,  pages 223-230, Philadelphia, 
PA.

Sabine Schulte im Walde. to appear.  The Induction  of 
Verb Frames and Verb Classes from Corpora. Corpus 
Linguistics. An International Handbook., Anke Lu¨ de- 
ling and Merja Kyto¨ (eds). Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.

Suzanne  Stevenson  and Eric Joanis.   2003.   Semi- 
supervised Verb Class Discovery  Using Noisy Fea-


bad hata´rozo´ k szaba´lyalapu´


kezele´se  [A Rule-based


tures. Proceedings of the 7th 
Conference on Computa-


Analysis of Complements and Adjuncts]. Proceedings 
of the 3th Hungarian  Conference of Computational 
Linguistics (MSZNY05), pages 245-256,  Szeged, Hun- 
gary.

Eric Joanis and Suzanne Stevenson.   2003. A general 
feature space for automatic verb classification. Pro-


tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-03), pages
71-78, Edmonton, Canada.

Tama´s Va´radi.   2002. The Hungarian National Corpus.
Proceedings of the Third International  Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation,  pages 385–389, 
Las Palmas, Spain.

