We will closely coordinate the further development of our corpus with the annotation work in Verbmobil and with other German efforts in corpus annotation.We describe an annotation scheme and a tool developed for creating linguistically annotated corpora for non-configurational languages.As theory-independence is one of our objectives  the annotation scheme incorporates a number of widely accepted linguistic analyses  especially in the area of verbal  adverbial and adjectival syntax.As the annotation scheme described in this paper focusses on annotating argument structure rather than constituent trees  it differs from existing treebanks in several aspects.As modern linguistics is also becoming more aware of the importance of larger sets of naturally occurring data.  interpreted corpora. are a. valuable resource for theoretical and descriptive linguistic research.We distinguish five degrees of automation: So far  about 1100 sentences of our corpus have been annotated.(Marcus et. al.  1994)  (Sampson  1995)  (Black et. al.(Cutting et al.  1992) and (Feldweg  1995)).(Lehmann et al.  1996)  (Marcus et al.  1994)  (Sampson  1995)).For evaluation  the already annotated sentences were divided into two disjoint sets  one for training (90% of the corpus)  the other one for testing (10%).Such a word order independent representation has the advantage of all structural information being encoded in a single data structure.Due to the frequency of discontinuous constituents in non-configurational languages  the filler-trace mechanism would be used very often  yielding syntactic trees fairly different from the underlying predicate-argument structures.The corpus is stored in a SQL database.As for free word order languages  the following features may cause problems: sition between the two poles.On the basis of these considerations  we formulate several additional requirements.Accuracy for these cases is 97%.Since the requirements for such a formalism differ from those posited for configurational languages  several features have been added  influencing the architecture of the scheme.Headed and non-headed structures are distinguished by the presence or absence of a branch labeled HD.Argument structure can be represented in terms of unordered trees (with crossing branches).The underlying argument SirlteilITC is not represented directly  but can be recovered from the tree and trace-filler annotations.Furthermore  the required theory-independence means that the form of syntactic trees should not reflect theory-specific assumptions  e.g. every syntactic structure has a unique head.This work is part of the DFG Sonderforschungsbereich 378 Rcsource-Adaptim Cogniiivc Proccsses  We wish to thank Tania Avgustinova  Berthold Crysmann  Lars Konieczny  Stephan Oepen  Karel Oliva.  Christian Weil3 and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on the content of this paper.The following commands are available: The three tagsets used by the annotation tool (for words  phrases  and edges) are variable and are stored together with the corpus.The work reported in this paper aims at providing syntactically annotated corpora (treebanks') for stochastic grammar induction.These differences can be illustrated by a comparison with the Penn Treebank annotation scheme.We also wish to thank Robert MacIntyre and Ann Taylor for valuable discussions on the Penn Treebank annotation.Thus the context-free constituent backbone plays a pivotal role in the annotation scheme.During annotation  the highest rated grammatical function labels Gi are calculated using the Viterbi algorithm and assigned to the structure  i.e.  we calculate argma.x11 PQ (Ti 1Z-1  Ti.-2) PQ (Gi ITi).To keep the human annotator from missing errors made by the tagger  we additionally calculate the strongest competitor for each label G. If its probability is close to the winner (closeness is defined by a threshold on the quotient)  the assignment is regarded as unreliable  and the annotator is asked to confirm the assignment.Syntactically annotated corpora of German have been missing until now.In general  the resulting interpreted data also are closer to semantic annotation and more neutral with respect to particular syntactic theories.The difference between the particular NK's lies in the positional and part-of-speech information  which is also sufficient to recover theory-specific structures from our `underspecified' representations.(Lehmann et al.  1996)) most effort  has been put in developing an efficient keyboard interface.During the first phase  the focus is on annotating correct structures and a coarse-grained classification of grammatical functions  which represent the following areas of information: Dependency type: complements are further classified according to features such as category and case: clausal complements (OC)  accusative objects (OA)  datives (DA)  etc.Since a precise structural description of non-constituent coordination would require a. rich inventory of incomplete phrase types  we have agreed on a sort of unde.rspe.cified representations: the coordinated units are assigned structures in which missing lexical material is not represented at the level of primary links.A problem for the rudimentary argument. structure representations is the use of incomplete structures in natural language  i.e. phenomena such as coordination and ellipsis.